<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
        <head>
                <title>Endnotes</title>
                <link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
                <link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
        </head>
        <body epub:type="backmatter z3998:non-fiction">
                <section id="endnotes" epub:type="endnotes">
                        <h2 epub:type="title">Endnotes</h2>
                        <ol>


<li><p>John Rae, <i>Life of Adam Smith,</i> 1895, p. 284.</p></li>
<li><p><i>Ibid.,</i> p. 285.</p></li>
<li><p><i>Ibid.,</i> p. 324.</p></li>
<li><p>Below, vol. i., p. 462; vol. ii., p. 423.</p></li>
<li><p>See vol. ii., p. 79, as well as the passages referred to in the previous note.</p></li>
<li><p>Vol. ii., pp. 75, 86, 115.</p></li>
<li><p>Rae, <i>Life of Adam Smith,</i> p. 362.</p></li>
<li><p><i>Ibid.,</i> p. 323.</p></li>
<li><p><i>Ibid.,</i> p. 362.</p></li>
<li><p>Edition 4 alters ‘this’ to ‘the’.</p></li>
<li><p>Edition 4 omits ‘present’.</p></li>
<li><p>They are frequently found at the end of existing bound copies of the second edition. The statement in Rae, <i>Life of Adam Smith,</i> p. 362, that they were published in 1783 is a mistake; cp. the ‘Advertisement to the Third Edition’ above.</p></li>
<li><p>Rae, <i>Life of Adam Smith,</i> p. 362.</p></li>
<li><p>Corrected
 to ‘Hope’ in edition 5. The celebrated firm of Hope, merchant-bankers
in Amsterdam, was founded by a Scotchman in the seventeenth century (see
 Sir Thomas Hope in the <i>Dictionary of National Biography</i>).
 Henry Hope was born in Boston, Mass., in 1736, and passed six years in a
 banking house in England before he joined his relatives in Amsterdam.
He became a partner with them, and on the death of Adrian Hope the
conduct of the whole of the business of the firm devolved upon him. When
 the French invaded Holland in 1794 he retired to England. He died on
25th February, 1811, leaving £1,160,000 (<i>Gentleman’s Magazine,</i> March, 1811).</p></li>
<li><p>Most
 modern editions are copied from the fourth edition. Thorold Rogers’
edition, however, though said in the preface to be copied from the
fourth, as a matter of fact follows the third. In one instance, indeed,
the omission of ‘so’ before ‘as long as’ at vol. i., p. 43, line 25 (in
the present edition), Rogers’ text agrees with that of the fourth
edition rather than the third, but this is an accidental coincidence in
error; the error is a particularly easy one to make and it is actually
corrected in the errata to the fourth edition, so that it is not really
the reading of that edition. The fifth edition must not be confused with
 a spurious ‘fifth edition with additions’ in 2 vols., 8vo, published in
 Dublin in 1793 with the ‘Advertisement’ to the third edition
deliberately falsified by the substitution of ‘fifth’ for ‘third’ in the
 sentence ‘To this third edition however I have made several additions’.
 It is perhaps the existence of this spurious ‘fifth edition’ which has
led several writers (<i>e.g.,</i> Rae, <i>Life of Adam Smith,</i> p. 293) to ignore the genuine fifth edition. The sixth edition is dated 1791.</p></li>
<li><p>Steuart’s <i>Principles</i> was ‘printed for A. Millar, and T. Cadell, in the Strand’: and the <i>Wealth of Nations</i> ‘for W. Strahan; and T. Cadell, in the Strand’.</p></li>
<li><p><i>Lectures on Justice, Police, Revenue and Arms,</i>
 delivered in the University of Glasgow by Adam Smith. Reported by a
student in 1763, and edited with an Introduction and Notes by Edwin
Cannan, 1896, pp. 1, 3.</p></li>
<li><p><i>Ibid.,</i> pp. 3, 4.</p></li>
<li><p><i>Lectures,</i> p. 154.</p></li>
<li><p>See James Bonar, <i>Catalogue of the Library of Adam Smith,</i> 1894.</p></li>
<li><p><i>Lectures,</i> p. 157.</p></li>
<li><p><i>Ibid.,</i> p. 154.</p></li>
<li><p><i>Ibid.,</i> p. 156.</p></li>
<li><p><i>Lectures,</i> p. 157.</p></li>
<li><p><i>Ibid.,</i> p. 163.</p></li>
<li><p><i>Ibid.,</i> pp. 172-3.</p></li>
<li><p><i>Ibid.,</i> p. 178.</p></li>
<li><p><i>Ibid.,</i> p. 182.</p></li>
<li><p><i>Lectures,</i> p. 192.</p></li>
<li><p><i>Ibid.,</i> p. 195.</p></li>
<li><p><i>Ibid.,</i> p. 195.</p></li>
<li><p><i>Ibid.,</i> p. 196.</p></li>
<li><p><i>Ibid.,</i> p. 197.</p></li>
<li><p><i>Ibid.,</i> p. 199.</p></li>
<li><p><i>Ibid.,</i> p. 200.</p></li>
<li><p><i>Ibid.,</i> p. 204.</p></li>
<li><p><i>Ibid.,</i> p. 204.</p></li>
<li><p><i>Lectures,</i> p. 206.</p></li>
<li><p><i>Ibid.,</i> p. 207.</p></li>
<li><p><i>Ibid.,</i> p. 209.</p></li>
<li><p><i>Ibid.,</i> pp. 211-19.</p></li>
<li><p><i>Ibid.,</i> pp. 219-22.</p></li>
<li><p><i>Ibid.,</i> p. 222.</p></li>
<li><p><i>Ibid.,</i> pp. 222-3.</p></li>
<li><p><i>Lectures,</i> pp. 223-36.</p></li>
<li><p><i>Ibid.,</i> p. 253.</p></li>
<li><p><i>Ibid.,</i> p. 254.</p></li>
<li><p><i>Ibid.,</i> p. 255.</p></li>
<li><p><i>Ibid.,</i> p. 256.</p></li>
<li><p><i>Ibid.,</i> pp. 256, 257.</p></li>
<li><p><i>Lectures,</i> p. 258.</p></li>
<li><p><i>Ibid.,</i> p. 236.</p></li>
<li><p><i>Ibid.,</i> p. 239.</p></li>
<li><p><i>Ibid.,</i> pp. 241, 242.</p></li>
<li><p><i>Ibid.,</i> pp. 242, 243.</p></li>
<li><p><i>Lectures,</i> p. 243.</p></li>
<li><p><i>Ibid.,</i> p. 245.</p></li>
<li><p><i>Ibid.,</i> pp. 246, 247.</p></li>
<li><p><i>Ibid.,</i> pp. 247-52.</p></li>
<li><p><i>Ibid.,</i> p. 261.</p></li>
<li><p><i>Ibid.,</i> p. 263.</p></li>
<li><p>There is a reminiscence of them in the chapter on Rent, vol. i., pp. 164-5.</p></li>
<li><p>See above, p. xxvi.</p></li>
<li><p>See below, pp. xlvi, xlvii, for a conjecture on this subject.</p></li>
<li><p>Below, vol. ii., p. 177, note 2.</p></li>
<li><p>Dugald
 Stewart, in his ‘Account of the Life and Writings of Adam Smith,’ read
to the Royal Society of Edinburgh in 1793 and published in Adam Smith’s
posthumous <i>Essays on Philosophical Subjects,</i> 1795, p. xviii. See Rae, <i>Life of Adam Smith,</i> pp. 53-5.</p></li>
<li><p>Rae, <i>Life of Adam Smith,</i> pp. 42-5.</p></li>
<li><p>Stewart, in Smith’s <i>Essays,</i> pp. lxxx, lxxxi.</p></li>
<li><p>Rae, <i>Life of Adam Smith,</i> pp. 43-4.</p></li>
<li><p>W. R. Scott, <i>Francis Hutcheson,</i> 1900, pp. 210, 231. In the <i>Introduction to Moral Philosophy,</i> 1747, Civil Polity is replaced by ‘Œconomicks and Politicks,’ but ‘Œconomicks’ only means domestic law, <i>i.e.,</i> the rights of husbands and wives, parents and children, masters and servants.</p></li>
<li><p><i>System of Moral Philosophy,</i> vol. i., pp. 288, 289.</p></li>
<li><p><i>System of Moral Philosophy,</i> vol. i., pp. 319-21.</p></li>
<li><p><i>System of Moral Philosophy,</i> vol. ii., p. 58.</p></li>
<li><p><i>Ibid.,</i> vol. ii., pp. 62, 63.</p></li>
<li><p><i>System of Moral Philosophy,</i> pp. 71-2.</p></li>
<li><p><i>Ibid.,</i> vol. ii., p. 73.</p></li>
<li><p><i>System of Moral Philosophy,</i> vol. ii., pp. 318-21.</p></li>
<li><p><i>Ibid.,</i> vol. ii., pp. 323-5.</p></li>
<li><p><i>Ibid.,</i> pp. 340-1.</p></li>
<li><p><i>System of Moral Philosophy,</i> vol. ii., pp. 341-2.</p></li>
<li><p><i>Francis Hutcheson,</i> pp. 232-5.</p></li>
<li><p>In the preface to Hutcheson’s <i>System of Moral Philosophy,</i> pp. xxxv, xxxvi.</p></li>
<li><p>Rae, <i>Life of Adam Smith,</i> p. 411.</p></li>
<li><p><i>Moral Sentiments,</i> 1759, pp. 464-6.</p></li>
<li><p>Below, vol. i., p. 16.</p></li>
<li><p><i>Moral Sentiments,</i> 1759, p. 474.</p></li>
<li><p><i>Ibid.,</i> 1759, p. 483.</p></li>
<li><p><i>Ibid.,</i> p. 485.</p></li>
<li><p><i>Moral Sentiments,</i> 1759, p. 487.</p></li>
<li><p><i>Fable of the Bees,</i> 1714, preface.</p></li>
<li><p>Pp. 11.13 in the ed. of 1705.</p></li>
<li><p>Pp. 427-8 in 2nd ed., 1723.</p></li>
<li><p>P. 465 in ed. of 1724.</p></li>
<li><p>Below, vol. ii., p. 43.</p></li>
<li><p><i>Lectures,</i> p. 197.</p></li>
<li><p>Above, pp. xxvi, xxix. Moreover, before bringing out the second edition of his <i>Discourses,</i>
 Hume wrote to Adam Smith asking for suggestions. That Smith made no
remark on the protectionist passage in the discourse on the Balance of
Trade seems to be indicated by the fact that it remained unaltered (see
Hume’s <i>Essays,</i> ed. Green &amp; Grose, vol. i., pp. 59, 343 and 344).</p></li>
<li><p>[This
 word, with ‘annually’ just below, at once marks the transition from the
 older British economists’ ordinary practice of regarding the wealth of a
 nation as an accumulated fund. Following the physiocrats, Smith sees
that the important thing is how much can be produced in a given time.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Cp. with this phrase Locke, <i>Some Considerations of the Consequences of the Lowering of Interest and Raising the Value of Money,</i>
 ed. of 1696, p. 66, ‘the intrinsic natural worth of anything consists
in its fitness to supply the necessities or serve the conveniencies of
human life.’]</p></li>
<li><p>[The
 implication that the nation’s welfare is to be reckoned by the average
welfare of its members, not by the aggregate, is to be noticed.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘with which labour is generally applied in it’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[This
 second circumstance may be stretched so as to include the duration and
intensity of the labour of those who are usefully employed, but another
important circumstance, the quantity and quality of the accumulated
instruments of production, is altogether omitted.</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘and’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Only one cause, the division of labour, is actually treated.]</p></li>
<li><p>[For the physiocratic origin of the technical use of the terms ‘distribute’ and ‘distribution’ see the Editor’s Introduction.]</p></li>
<li><p>[This
 word slips in here as an apparently unimportant synonym of ‘useful,’
but subsequently ousts ‘useful’ altogether, and is explained in such a
way that unproductive labour may be useful; see esp. below p. 314.]</p></li>
<li><p>[See the index for the examples of the use of this term.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 does not contain ‘to explain’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘what is the nature’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘is treated of in’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘of the society’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Read
 in conjunction with the first two paragraphs, this sentence makes it
clear that the wealth of a nation is to be reckoned by its <i>per capita</i> income. But this view is often temporarily departed from in the course of the work; see the index, <i>s.v.</i> Wealth.]</p></li>
<li><p>[This
 phrase, if used at all before this time, was not a familiar one. Its
presence here is probably due to a passage in Mandeville, <i>Fable of the Bees,</i> pt. ii. (1729), dial. vi., p. 335: ‘<span class="csc">Cleo.</span>
 . . . When once men come to be governed by written laws, all the rest
comes on apace . . . No number of men, when once they enjoy quiet, and
no man needs to fear his neighbour, will be long without learning to
divide and subdivide their labour. <span class="csc">Hor.</span> I don’t understand you. <span class="csc">Cleo.</span>
 Man, as I have hinted before, naturally loves to imitate what he sees
others do, which is the reason that savage people all do the same thing:
 this hinders them from meliorating their condition, though they are
always wishing for it: but if one will wholly apply himself to the
making of bows and arrows, whilst another provides food, a third builds
huts, a fourth makes garments, and a fifth utensils, they not only
become useful to one another, but the callings and employments
themselves will, in the same number of years, receive much greater
improvements, than if all had been promiscuously followed by every one
of the five. <span class="csc">Hor.</span> I believe you are perfectly
right there; and the truth of what you say is in nothing so conspicuous
as it is in watch-making, which is come to a higher degree of perfection
 than it would have been arrived at yet, if the whole had always
remained the employment of one person; and I am persuaded that even the
plenty we have of clocks and watches, as well as the exactness and
beauty they may be made of, are chiefly owing to the division that has
been made of that art into many branches.’ The index contains, ‘Labour,
The usefulness of dividing and subdividing it’. Joseph Harris, <i>Essay upon Money and Coins,</i>
 1757, pt. i., § 12, treats of the ‘usefulness of distinct trades,’ or
‘the advantages accruing to mankind from their betaking themselves
severally to different occupations,’ but does not use the phrase
‘division of labour’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘improvements’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘Though in them’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Another
 and perhaps more important reason for taking an example like that which
 follows is the possibility of exhibiting the advantages of division of
labour in statistical form.]</p></li>
<li><p>[This
 parenthesis would alone be sufficient to show that those are wrong who
believe Smith did not include the separation of employments in ‘division
 of labour’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[In Adam Smith’s <i>Lectures,</i> p. 164, the business is, as here, divided into eighteen operations. This number is doubtless taken from the <i>Encyclopédie,</i> tom. v. (published in 1755), <i>s.v.</i>
 Épingle. The article is ascribed to M. Delaire, ‘qui décrivait la
fabrication de l’épingle dans les ateliers même des ouvriers,’ p. 807.
In some factories the division was carried further. E. Chambers, <i>Cyclopædia,</i> vol. ii., 2nd ed., 1738, and 4th ed., 1741, <i>s.v.</i> Pin, makes the number of separate operations twenty-five.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘the’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘the lands’ here and two lines higher up.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘because the silk manufacture does not suit the climate of England’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[In <i>Lectures,</i> p. 164, the comparison is between English and French ‘toys,’ <i>i.e.,</i> small metal articles.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 places ‘in consequence of the division of labour’ here instead of in the line above.]</p></li>
<li><p>[‘Pour
 la célérité du travail et la perfection de l’ouvrage, elles dépendent
entièrement de la multitude des ouvriers rassemblés. Lorsqu’une
manufacture est nombreuse, chaque opération occupe un homme différent.
Tel ouvrier ne fait et ne fera de sa vie qu’une seule et unique chose;
tel autre une autre chose: d’où il arrive que chacune s’exécute bien et
promptement, et que l’ouvrage le mieux fait est encore celui qu’on a à
meilleur marché. D’ailleurs le goût et la façon se perfectionnent
nécessairement entre un grand nombre d’ouvriers, parce qu’il est
difficile qu’il ne s’en rencontre quelquesuns capables de réfléchir, de
combiner, et de trouver enfin le seul moyen qui puisse les mettre
audessus de leurs semblables; le moyen ou d’épargner la matière, ou
d’allonger le temps, ou de surfaire l’industrie, soit par une machine
nouvelle, soit par une manœuvre plus commode.’—<i>Encyclopédie,</i> tom i. (1751), p. 717, <i>s.v.</i> Art. All three advantages mentioned in the text above are included here.]</p></li>
<li><p>[In <i>Lectures,</i>
 p. 166, ‘a country smith not accustomed to make nails will work very
hard for three or four hundred a day and those too very bad’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[In <i>Lectures,</i> p. 166, ‘a boy used to it will easily make two thousand and those incomparably better’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[In <i>Lectures,</i> p. 255, it is implied that the labour of making a button was divided among eighty persons.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The same example occurs in <i>Lectures,</i> p. 166.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Examples are given in <i>Lectures,</i>
 p. 167: ‘Two men and three horses will do more in a day with the plough
 than twenty men without it. The miller and his servant will do more
with the water mill than a dozen with the hand mill, though it too be a
machine.’]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘I shall, therefore, only observe’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘machines employed’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘of common’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>I.e.,</i> steam-engines.]</p></li>
<li><p>[This
 pretty story is largely, at any rate, mythical. It appears to have
grown out of a misreading (not necessarily by Smith) of the following
passage: ‘They used before to work with a buoy in the cylinder enclosed
in a pipe, which buoy rose when the steam was strong, and opened the
injection, and made a stroke; thereby they were capable of only giving
six, eight or ten strokes in a minute, till a boy, Humphry Potter, who
attended the engine, added (what he called scoggan) a catch that the
beam Q always opened; and then it would go fifteen or sixteen strokes in
 a minute. But this being perplexed with catches and strings, Mr. Henry
Beighton, in an engine he had built at Newcastle-on-Tyne in 1718, took
them all away, the beam itself simply supplying all much better.’—J. T.
Desaguliers, <i>Course of Experimental Philosophy,</i> vol. ii., 1744, p. 533. From pp. 469, 471, it appears that hand labour was originally used before the ‘buoy’ was devised.]</p></li>
<li><p>[In <i>Lectures,</i>
 p. 167, the invention of the plough is conjecturally attributed to a
farmer and that of the hand-mill to a slave, while the invention of the
water-wheel and the steam engine is credited to philosophers. Mandeville
 is very much less favourable to the claims of the philosophers: ‘They
are very seldom the same sort of people, those that invent arts and
improvements in them and those that inquire into the reason of things:
this latter is most commonly practised by such as are idle and indolent,
 that are fond of retirement, hate business and take delight in
speculation; whereas none succeed oftener in the first than active,
stirring and laborious men, such as will put their hand to the plough,
try experiments and give all their attention to what they are about.’—<i>Fable of the Bees,</i> pt. ii. (1729), dial. iii., p. 151. He goes on to give as examples the improvements in soap-boiling, grain-dyeing, etc.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The
 advantage of producing particular commodities wholly or chiefly in the
countries most naturally fitted for their production is recognised
below, p. 423, but the fact that division of labour is necessary for its
 attainment is not noticed. The fact that division of labour allows
different workers to be put exclusively to the kind of work for which
they are best fitted by qualities not acquired by education and
practice, such as age, sex, size and strength, is in part ignored and in
 part denied below, pp. 17, 18. The disadvantage of division of labour
or specialisation is dealt with below, vol. ii., pp. 267-269.]</p></li>
<li><p>[This paragraph was probably taken bodily from the MS. of the author’s lectures. It appears to be founded on Locke, <i>Civil Government,</i> § 43; Mandeville, <i>Fable of the Bees,</i> pt. i., Remark P, 2nd ed., 1723, p. 182, and perhaps Harris, <i>Essay upon Money and Coins,</i> pt. i., § 12. See <i>Lectures,</i> pp. 161-162 and notes.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>I.e.,</i>
 it is not the effect of any conscious regulation by the state or
society, like the ‘law of Sesostris,’ that every man should follow the
employment of his father, referred to in the corresponding passage in <i>Lectures,</i>
 p. 168. The denial that it is the effect of individual wisdom
recognising the advantage of exercising special natural talents comes
lower down, p. 17.]</p></li>
<li><p>[It is by no means clear what object there could be in exchanging one bone for another.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Misprinted ‘intirely’ in eds. 1-5. ‘Entirely’ occurs a little lower down in all eds.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The paragraph is repeated from <i>Lectures,</i> p. 169. It is founded on Mandeville, <i>Fable of the Bees,</i> pt. ii. (1729), dial. vi., pp. 421, 422.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Lectures,</i> pp. 169-170.]</p></li>
<li><p>[This is apparently directed against Harris, <i>Money and Coins,</i>
 pt. i., § 11, and is in accordance with the view of Hume, who asks
readers to ‘consider how nearly equal all men are in their bodily force,
 and even in their mental powers and faculties, ere cultivated by
education’.—‘Of the Original Contract,’ in <i>Essays, Moral and Political,</i> 1748, p. 291.]</p></li>
<li><p>[‘Perhaps’ is omitted in eds. 2 and 3, and restored in the errata to ed. 4.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Lectures,</i> pp. 170-171.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The superiority of carriage by sea is here considerably less than in <i>Lectures,</i> p. 172, but is still probably exaggerated. W. Playfair, ed. of <i>Wealth of Nations,</i>
 1805, vol. i., p. 29, says a waggon of the kind described could carry
eight tons, but, of course, some allowance must be made for thirty years
 of road improvement.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘which is at present carried on’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Playfair, <i>op. cit.,</i>
 p. 30, says that equalising the out and home voyages goods were carried
 from London to Calcutta by sea at the same price (12s. per cwt.) as
from London to Leeds by land.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘was’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘carry on together a very considerable commerce’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[This shows a curious belief in the wave-producing capacity of the tides.]</p></li>
<li><p>[It is only in recent times that this word has become applicable especially to artificial channels; see Murray, <i>Oxford English Dictionary, s.v.</i>]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘break themselves into many canals’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The
 real difficulty is that the mouths of the rivers are in the Arctic Sea,
 so that they are separated. One of the objects of the Siberian railway
is to connect them.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘any one’ here.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The passage corresponding to this chapter is comprised in one paragraph in <i>Lectures,</i> p. 172.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The paragraph has a close resemblance to Harris, <i>Money and Coins,</i> pt. i., §§ 19, 20.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Iliad,</i> vi., 236: quoted with the same object in Pliny, <i>Hist. Nat.,</i> lib. xxxiii., cap. i.; Pufendorf, <i>De jure naturæ et gentium,</i> lib. v., cap. v., § 1; Martin-Leake, <i>Historical Account of English Money,</i> 2nd ed., 1745, p. 4 and elsewhere.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Montesquieu, <i>Esprit des lois,</i> liv. xxii., chap i., note.]</p></li>
<li><p>[W. Douglass, <i>A
 Summary Historical and Political of the First Planting, Progressive
Improvements and Present State of the British Settlements in North
America,</i> 1760, vol. ii., p. 364. Certain law officers’ fees in Washington were still computed in tobacco in 1888.—J. J. Labor, <i>Cyclopædia of Political Science,</i> 1888, <i>s.v.</i> Money, p. 879.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Playfair, ed. of <i>Wealth of Nations,</i>
 1805, vol. i., p. 36, says the explanation of this is that factors
furnish the nailers with materials, and during the time they are working
 give them a credit for bread, cheese and chandlery goods, which they
pay for in nails when the iron is worked up. The fact that nails are
metal is forgotten at the beginning of the next paragraph in the text
above.]</p></li>
<li><p>[For earlier theories as to these reasons see Grotius, <i>De jure belli et pacis,</i> lib. ii., cap. xii., § 17; Pufendorf, <i>De jure naturæ et gentium,</i> lib. v., cap. i., § 13; Locke, <i>Some Considerations,</i> 2nd ed., 1696, p. 31; Law, <i>Money and Trade,</i> 1705, ch. i.; Hutcheson, <i>System of Moral Philosophy,</i> 1755, vol. ii., pp. 55, 56; Montesquieu, <i>Esprit des lois,</i> liv. xxii., ch. ii.; Cantillon, <i>Essai sur la Nature du Commerce en général,</i> 1755, pp. 153, 355-357; Harris, <i>Money and Coins,</i> pt. i., §§ 22-27, and cp. <i>Lectures,</i> pp. 182-185.]</p></li>
<li><p>Plin.
 Hist. Nat. lib. 33. cap. 3. [‘Servius rex primus signavit aes. Antea
rudi usos Romæ Timæus tradit.’ Ed. 1 reads ‘authority of one Remeus, an
antient author,’ Remeus being the reading in the edition of Pliny in
Smith’s library, cp. Bonar’s <i>Catalogue of the Library of Adam Smith,</i> 1894, p. 87. Ed. 1 does not contain the note.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘weighing them’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘with the trouble’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Aristotle, <i>Politics,</i> 1257<i>a,</i> 38-41; quoted by Pufendorf, <i>De jure naturæ et gentium,</i> lib. v., cap. i., § 12.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The aulnager measured woollen cloth in England under 25 Ed. III., st. 4, c. 1. See John Smith, <i>Chronicon Rusticum-Commerciale or Memoirs of Wool,</i>
 1747, vol. i., p. 37. The stampmasters of linen cloth in the linen
districts of Scotland were appointed under 10 Ann., c. 21, to prevent
‘divers abuses and deceits’ which ‘have of late years been used in the
manufacturies of linen cloth . . . with respect to the lengths, breadths
 and unequal sorting of yarn, which leads to the great debasing and
undervaluing of the said linen cloth both at home and in foreign
parts.’—<i>Statutes of the Realm,</i> vol. ix., p. 682.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Genesis xxiii. 16.]</p></li>
<li><p>[‘King William the First, for the better pay of his warriors, caused the <i>firmes</i> which till his time had for the most part been answered in victuals, to be converted <i>in pecuniam numeratam.</i>’—Lowndes, <i>Report containing an Essay for the Amendment of the Silver Coins,</i> 1695, p. 4. Hume, whom Adam Smith often follows, makes no such absurd statement, <i>History,</i> ed. of 1773, vol. i., pp. 225, 226.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Lowndes, <i>Essay,</i> p. 4.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, p. 26.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The
 Assize of Bread and Ale, 51 Hen. III., contains an elaborate scale
beginning, ‘When a quarter of wheat is sold for xii d. then wastel bread
 of a farthing shall weigh vi l. and xvi s.’ and goes on to the figures
quoted in the text above. The statute is quoted at second-hand from
Martin Folkes’ <i>Table of English Silver Coins</i> with the same object by Harris, <i>Essay upon Money and Coins,</i>
 pt. i., § 29, but Harris does not go far enough in the scale to bring
in the penny as a weight. As to this scale see below, pp. 179, 183.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘twenty, forty and forty-eight pennies’. Garnier, <i>Recherches sur la nature et les causes de la richesse des nations, par Adam Smith,</i> 1802, tom. v., p. 55, in a note on this passage says that the sou was always twelve deniers.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Hume, <i>History of England,</i> ed. of 1773, i., p. 226. Fleetwood, <i>Chronicon Preciosum,</i> 1707, p. 30. These authorities say there were 48 shillings in the pound, so that 240 pence would still make £1.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Harris, <i>Money and Coins,</i> pt. i., § 29.]</p></li>
<li><p>[‘It is thought that soon after the Conquest a pound sterling was divided into twenty shillings.’—Hume, <i>History of England,</i> ed. of 1773, vol. i., p. 227.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Pliny, <i>Hist. Nat.,</i> lib. xxxiii., cap. iii.; see below, vol. ii., pp. 416, 417.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Harris, <i>Money and Coins,</i> p. i., § 30, note, makes the French livre about one seventieth part of its original value.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The
 subject of debased and depreciated coinage occurs again below, pp. 36,
37, 194; vol. ii., pp. 51-57, 415-418. One of the reasons why gold and
silver became the most usual forms of money is dealt with below, pp.
172, 173. See Coin and Money in the index.]</p></li>
<li><p>[In <i>Lectures,</i>
 pp. 182-190, where much of this chapter is to be found, money is
considered ‘first as the measure of value and then as the medium of
permutation or exchange’. Money is said to have had its origin in the
fact that men naturally fell upon one commodity with which to compare
the value of all other commodities. When this commodity was once
selected it became the medium of exchange. In this chapter money comes
into use from the first as a medium of exchange, and its use as a
measure of value is not mentioned. The next chapter explains that it is
vulgarly used as a measure of value because it is used as an instrument
of commerce or medium of exchange.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Lectures,</i> p. 157. Law, <i>Money and Trade,</i> 1705, ch. i. (followed by Harris, <i>Money and Coins,</i> pt. i., § 3), contrasts the value of water with that of diamonds. The cheapness of water is referred to by Plato, <i>Euthydem.</i> 304 B., quoted by Pufendorf, <i>De jure naturæ et gentium,</i> lib. v., cap. i., § 6; cp. Barbeyrac’s note on § 4.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘subject which is’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[‘La richesse en elle-même n’est autre chose que la nourriture, les commodités et les agréments de la vie.’—Cantillon, <i>Essai,</i> pp. 1, 2.]</p></li>
<li><p>[‘Everything in the world is purchased by labour.’—Hume, ‘Of Commerce,’ in <i>Political Discourses,</i> 1752, p. 12.]</p></li>
<li><p>[‘Also
 riches joined with liberality is Power, because it procureth friends
and servants: without liberality not so, because in this case they
defend not but expose men to envy as a prey.’—<i>Leviathan,</i> I., x.]</p></li>
<li><p>[This paragraph appears first in Additions and Corrections and ed. 3.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The absence of any reference to the lengthy discussion of this subject in chap. x. is curious.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Below, p. 191.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘there’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘Equal quantities of labour must at all times and places be’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The words from ‘In his ordinary state of health’ to ‘dexterity’ appear first in ed. 2.]</p></li>
<li><p>[‘Be
 above all things careful how you make any composition or agreement for
any long space of years to receive a certain price of money for the corn
 that is due to you, although for the present it may seem a tempting
bargain.’—Fleetwood, <i>Chronicon Preciosum,</i> p. 174.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, pp. 28-29.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Below, pp. 215-216.]</p></li>
<li><p>[C.
 6, which applies to Oxford, Cambridge, Winchester and Eton, and
provides that no college shall make any lease for lives or years of
tithes, arable land or pasture without securing that at least one-third
of ‘tholde’ (presumably the whole not the old) rent should be paid in
coin. The Act was promoted by Sir Thomas Smith to the astonishment, it
is said, of his fellow-members of Parliament, who could not see what
difference it would make. ‘But the knight took the advantage of the
present cheapness; knowing hereafter grain would grow dearer, mankind
daily multiplying, and licence being lately given for transportation. So
 that at this day much emolument redoundeth to the colleges in each
university, by the passing of this Act; and though their rents stand
still, their revenues do increase.’—Fuller, <i>Hist. of the University of Cambridge,</i> 1655, p. 144, quoted in Strype, <i>Life of the learned Sir Thomas Smith,</i> 1698, p. 192.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Commentaries,</i> 1765, vol. ii., p. 322.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, p. 29.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Below, pp. 71-75.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Below, pp. 76, 87, 88.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Below, chap. xi., see esp. p. 191.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘it’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 places the ‘for example’ here.]</p></li>
<li><p>[‘In
 England and this part of the world, wheat being the constant and most
general food, not altering with the fashion, not growing by chance: but
as the farmers sow more or less of it, which they endeavour to
proportion, as near as can be guessed to the consumption, abstracting
the overplus of the precedent year in their provision for the next; and <i>vice versa,</i>
 it must needs fall out that it keeps the nearest proportion to its
consumption (which is more studied and designed in this than other
commodities) of anything, if you take it for seven or twenty years
together: though perhaps the scarcity of one year, caused by the
accidents of the season, may very much vary it from the immediately
precedent or following. Wheat, therefore, in this part of the world (and
 that grain which is the constant general food of any other country) is
the fittest measure to judge of the altered value of things in any long
tract of time: and therefore wheat here, rice in Turkey, etc., is the
fittest thing to reserve a rent in, which is designed to be constantly
the same for all future ages. But money is the best measure of the
altered value of things in a few years: because its vent is the same and
 its quantity alters slowly. But wheat, or any other grain, cannot serve
 instead of money: because of its bulkiness and too quick change of its
quantity.’ — Locke, <i>Some Considerations of the Consequences of the Lowering of Interest and Raising the Value of Money,</i> ed. of 1696, pp. 74, 75.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘than one which sells for an ounce at London to’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Below, chap. xi. <i>passim.</i>]</p></li>
<li><p>Pliny, lib. xxxiii. c. 3. [This note is not in ed. 1.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Eds. 1 and 2 read ‘always’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Habere aes alienum.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 does not contain ‘sterling’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 places the ‘originally’ here.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 places the ‘only’ here.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The
 Act, 19 Hen. VII., c. 5, ordered that certain gold coins should pass
for the sums for which they were coined, and 5 and 6 Ed. VI. prescribed
penalties for giving or taking more than was warranted by proclamation.
The value of the guinea was supposed to be fixed by the proclamation of
1717, for which see <i>Economic Journal,</i> March,
1898. Lead tokens were coined by individuals in the reign of Elizabeth.
James I. coined copper farthing tokens, but abstained from proclaiming
them as money of that value. In 1672 copper halfpennies were issued, and
 both halfpennies and farthings were ordered to pass as money of those
values in all payments under sixpence.—Harris, <i>Money and Coins,</i> pt. i., § 39; Liverpool, <i>Treatise on the Coins of the Realm,</i> 1805, pp. 130, 131.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘sum’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>I.e.,</i>
 if 21 pounds may be paid with 420 silver shillings or with 20 gold
guineas it does not matter whether a ‘pound’ properly signifies 20
silver shillings or 20/21 of a gold guinea.]</p></li>
<li><p>[This
 happens to have been usually, though not always, true, but it is so
simply because it has usually happened that the most precious metal in
use as money has been made or become the standard. Gold was already the
standard in England, though the fact was not generally recognised; see
Harris, <i>Money and Coins,</i> pt. ii., §§ 36, 37, and below, vol. ii., pp. 54-57.]</p></li>
<li><p>[In 1774.]</p></li>
<li><p>[These
 regulations, issued in 1774, provided that guineas should not pass when
 they had lost a certain portion of their weight, varying with their
age.—Liverpool, <i>Coins of the Realm,</i> p. 216, note.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Magens, <i>Universal Merchant,</i>
 ed. Horsley, 1753, pp. 53-55, gives the proportions thus: French coin, 1
 to 145803/12279, Dutch, 1 to 1482550/154425, English, 1 to
1514295/68200.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Full
 weight silver coins would not remain in circulation, as the bullion in
them was worth more reckoned in guineas and in the ordinary old and worn
 silver coins than the nominal amount stamped on them.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Locke, <i>Further Considerations Concerning Raising the Value of Money,</i>
 2nd ed., 1695, pp. 58-60. The exportation of foreign coin (misprinted
‘kind’ in Pickering) or bullion of gold or silver was permitted by 15
Car. II., c. 7, on the ground that it was ‘found by experience that’
money and bullion were ‘carried in greatest abundance (as to a common
market) to such places as give free liberty for exporting the same’ and
in order ‘the better to keep in and increase the current coins’ of the
kingdom.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Harris,
 writing nearly twenty years earlier, had said, ‘it would be a
ridiculous and vain attempt to make a standard integer of gold, whose
parts should be silver; or to make a motley standard, part gold and part
 silver.’—<i>Money and Coins,</i> pt. 1., § 36.</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>I.e.,</i> an ounce of standard gold would not actually fetch £3 175s. 10½d. if sold for cash down.</p></li>
<li><p>[This
 erroneous statement is repeated below, p. 442, and also vol. ii., p.
53, where the calculations on which it is based are given. See the note
on that passage.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The question of seignorage is further discussed at some length in the chapter on Commercial Treaties, vol. ii., pp. 51-57.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘in the tear and wear of coin, and in the tear and wear of plate’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed.
 1 does not contain ‘the whole produce of labour belongs to the
labourer; and’. The words, however, occur in all eds. at p. 66 below.]</p></li>
<li><p>[‘The capital annually employed’ is the working expenses for twelve months, not the capital in the usual modern sense.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 inserts ‘frequently’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Eds. 1 and 2 read ‘proportion to it’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘profits of stock are a source of value’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed.
 1 reads from the beginning of the paragraph: ‘In this state of things,
therefore, the quantity of labour commonly employed in acquiring or
producing any commodity is by no means the only circumstance’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Buchanan, ed. <i>Wealth of Nations,</i>
 1814, vol. i., p. 80, says: ‘They do so. But the question is why this
apparently unreasonable demand is so generally complied with. Other men
love also to reap where they never sowed, but the landlords alone, it
would appear, succeed in so desirable an object.’]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 does not contain ‘the labourer’ and ‘even to him’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed.
 1 in place of these two sentences reads: ‘Men must then pay for the
licence to gather them; and in exchanging them either for money, for
labour, or for other goods, over and above what is due, both for the
labour of gathering them, and for the profits of the stock which employs
 that labour, some allowance must be made for the price of the licence,
which constitutes the first rent of land. In the price therefore of the
greater part of commodities the rent of land comes in this manner to
constitute a third source of value. In this state of things, neither the
 quantity of labour commonly employed in acquiring or producing any
commodity, nor the profits of the stock which advanced the wages and
furnished the materials of that labour, are the only circumstances which
 can regulate the quantity of labour which it ought commonly to
purchase, command or exchange for. A third circumstance must likewise be
 taken into consideration; the rent of the land; and the commodity must
commonly purchase, command or exchange for, an additional quantity of
labour, in order to enable the person who brings it to market to pay
this rent.’]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘The real value of all the different component parts of price is in this manner measured’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Smith
 overlooks the fact that his inclusion of the maintenance of labouring
cattle here as a sort of wages requires him to include it in the
national income or ‘wealth of the nation,’ and therefore to reckon the
cattle themselves as part of the nation.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘tear and wear’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The
 use of ‘labour’ instead of the more natural ‘wages’ here is more
probably the result of its use five lines higher up than of any feeling
of difficulty about the maintenance of cattle. On p. 58 below ‘rent,
labour and profit’ and ‘rent, wages and profit’ are both used; see
below, p. 315, and note.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The fact that the later manufacturer has to replace what is here called the capital, <i>i.e.,</i>
 the periodical expenditure of the earlier manufacturer, does not
necessarily require him to have a greater capital to deal with the same
produce. It need not be greater if he requires less machinery and
buildings and a smaller stock of materials.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Below, p. 146.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Only true if ‘commodity’ be understood to include solely goods which constitute income.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The
 ‘whole annual produce’ must be taken to mean the income and not the
whole mass of goods produced, including those which perish or are used
up in the creation of others.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Some parts of this ‘other revenue,’ <i>viz.,</i>
 interest and taxes, are mentioned in the next paragraph. It is perhaps
also intended to include the rent of houses; see below, pp. 263, 264.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘sale of his work’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Below, pp. 113, 114.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Eds. 1-3 read ‘was’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The chapter follows <i>Lectures,</i> pp. 173-182, very closely.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Below, chaps. viii. and ix.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Below, chap. xi.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The same phrase occurs below, pp. 64, 101.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, p. 52 and note 4.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed.
 1, beginning three lines higher up, reads ‘according as the greatness
of the deficiency increases more or less the eagerness of this
competition. The same deficiency’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘the competitors’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘fall short of it’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[See below, p. 117.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Repeated below, p. 117.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 does not contain ‘more’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[They
 are called profits simply because all the gains of the
master-manufacturer are called profits. They can scarcely be said to
have been ‘considered’ at all; if they had been, they would doubtless
have been pronounced to be, in the words of the next paragraph, ‘the
effects of a particular accident,’ namely, the possession of peculiar
knowledge on the part of the dyer.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 places ‘for whole centuries together’ here instead of in the line above.]</p></li>
<li><p>[See below, pp. 120-131. Playfair, in a note on this passage, ed. <i>Wealth of Nations,</i>
 1805, vol. i., p. 97, says: ‘This observation about corporations and
apprenticeships scarcely applies at all to the present day. In London,
for example, the freemen only can carry on certain businesses within the
 city: there is not one of those businesses that may not be carried on
elsewhere, and the produce sold in the city. If Mr. Smith’s principle
applied, goods would be dearer in Cheapside than in Bond Street, which
is not the case.’]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, p. 58, and below, p. 101.]</p></li>
<li><p>[In <i>Lectures,</i> p. 168, the Egyptian practice is attributed to ‘a law of Sesostris’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The same nine words occur above, p. 49, in ed. 2 and later eds.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The word ‘cheaper’ is defined by the next sentence as ‘produced by a smaller quantity of labour’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[It
 would be less confusing if the sentence ran: ‘But though all things
would have become cheaper in the sense just attributed to the word, yet
in the sense in which the words cheaper and dearer are ordinarily used
many things might have become dearer than before.’]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>I.e.,</i> ‘would in the ordinary sense of the word be five times dearer than before’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>I.e.,</i> ‘in the sense attributed to the word above’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[If
 the amount of labour necessary for the acquisition of a thing measures
its value, ‘twice as cheap’ means simply, twice as easy to acquire.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘of whatever produce’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The provision of tools to work with and buildings to work in is forgotten.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Cp. with this account that given at the beginning of chap. vi., pp. 49, 50 above.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed.
 1 reads, ‘The masters being fewer in number can not only combine more
easily, but the law authorises their combinations, or at least does not
prohibit them’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>E.g.,</i>
 7 Geo. I., stat. 1, c. 13, as to London tailors; 12 Geo. I., c. 34, as
to woolcombers and weavers; 12 Geo. I., c. 35, as to brick and tile
makers within fifteen miles of London; 22 Geo. II., c. 27, § 12, as to
persons employed in the woollen manufacture and many others.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The
 word is used as elsewhere in Adam Smith without the implication of
falsity now attached to it: a pretence is simply something put forward.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 does not contain ‘either’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Essai sur la nature du commerce en général,</i>
 1755, pp. 42-47. The ‘seems’ is not meaningless, as Cantillon is
unusually obscure in the passage referred to. It is not clear whether he
 intends to include the woman’s earnings or not.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>I.e.,</i> before completing their seventeenth year, as stated by Dr. Halley, quoted by Cantillon, <i>Essai,</i> pp. 42, 43.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Cantillon
 himself, p. 44, says: ‘C’est une matière qui n’admet pas un calcul
exact, et dans laquelle la précision n’est pas même fort nécessaire, il
suffit qu’on ne s’y éloigne pas beaucoup de la réalité.’]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘them’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[There
 is no attempt to define ‘maintenance,’ and consequently the division of
 a man’s revenue into what is necessary for his maintenance and what is
over and above is left perfectly vague.]</p></li>
<li><p>[It seems to be implied here that keeping a menial servant, even to perform the most necessary offices (<i>e.g.,</i> to nurse the infant child of a widower), is not ‘maintaining’ a family.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above,
 p. 1, the wealth of a nation was treated as synonymous with its annual
produce, and there has been hitherto no suggestion that its stock must
be considered.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Apparently
 this is a slip for ‘occasions high wages’. At any rate the next
sentences require this assertion and not that actually made.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The
 method of calculating wealth by the amount of annual produce per head
adopted above, p. 1, is departed from here and below, p. 73, and
frequently in later passages, in favour of the calculation by amount of
capital wealth.]</p></li>
<li><p>This
 was written in 1773, before the commencement of the late disturbances.
[Ed. 1 does not contain this note; eds. 2 and 3 read ‘present
disturbances’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Petty, <i>Political Arithmetic,</i> 1699, p. 18, made the period for England 360 years. Gregory King, quoted by Davenant, <i>Works,</i>
 ed. Whitworth, 1771, vol. ii., p. 176, makes it 435 years in the past
and probably 600 in the future. In 1703 the population of Virginia was
60,000, in 1755 it was 300,000, and in 1765 it was 500,000, ‘by which
they appear to have doubled their numbers every twenty years as nigh as
may be’.—<i>The Present State of Great Britain and North America with regard to Agriculture, Population, Trade and Manufactures,</i>
 1767, p. 22, note. ‘The original number of persons who in 1643 had
settled in New England was 21,200. Ever since, it is reckoned that more
have left them than have gone to them. In the year 1760 they were
increased to half a million. They have therefore all along doubled their
 own number in twenty-five years.’—Richard Price, <i>Observations on Reversionary Payments,</i> etc., 1771, pp. 204, 205. The statement as to America is repeated below, p. 390.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Here
 we have a third method of calculating the riches or wealth of a
country, namely by the amount of produce per acre. For other references
to this ‘wealth’ of China see the index, <i>s.v.</i> China.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The date of his arrival was 1275.]</p></li>
<li><p>[‘Les artisans courent les villes du matin au soir pour chercher pratique,’ Quesnay, <i>Éphémérides du citoyen,</i> Mars, 1767; in <i>Œuvres,</i> ed. Oncken, 1888, p. 581.]</p></li>
<li><p>[‘Cependant
 quelque sobre et quelque industrieux que soit le peuple de la Chine, le
 grand nombre de ses habitants y cause beaucoup de misère. On en voit de
 si pauvres, que ne pouvant fournir à leurs enfants les aliments
nécessaires, ils les exposent dans les rues, surtout lorsque les mères
tombent malades, ou qu’elles manquent de lait pour les nourrir. Ces
petits innocents sont condamnés en quelque manière à la mort presque au
même instant qu’ils ont commencé de vivre: cela frappe dans les grandes
villes, comme Peking, Canton; car dans les autres villes à peine s’en
aperçoit-on.</p><p id="Smith_0206-01_1583">‘C’est ce qui a porté les
missionnaires à entretenir dans ces endroits très peuplés, un nombre de
catéchistes, qui en partagent entre eux tous les quartiers, et les
parcourent tous les matins, pour procurer la grâce du baptême à une
multitude d’enfants moribonds.</p><p id="Smith_0206-01_1584">‘Dans la
même vue on a quelquefois gagné des sages-femmes infidèles afin qu’elles
 permissent à des filles chrétiennes de les suivre dans les différentes
maisons où elles sont appelées: car il arrive quelquefois que les
Chinois se trouvant hors d’état de nourrir une nombreuse famille,
engagent ces sages-femmes à étouffer dans un bassin plein d’eau les
petites filles aussitôt qu’elles sont nées; ces chrétiennes ont soin de
les baptiser, et par ce moyen ces tristes victimes de l’indigence de
leurs parents trouvent la vie éternelle dans ces mêmes eaux, qui leur
ravissent une vie courte et périssable.’—Du Halde, <i>Description géographique, historique, chronologique, politique et physique de l’empire de la Chine et de la Tartarie chinoise,</i>
 1735, tom. ii., pp. 73, 74. The statement in the text above that
drowning babies is a special business is possibly founded on a
mistranslation of ‘sages-femmes’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Below, p. 114.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The difference between England and Scotland in this respect is attributed to the English law of settlement below, p. 142.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The inferiority of oatmeal is again insisted on below, p. 161.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Authorities are quoted below, pp. 239, 240.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Hume, <i>History,</i> ed. of 1773, vol. vi., p. 178, quoting Rymer’s <i>Foedera,</i> tom. xvi., p. 717. This was for service in Germany.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Sir Matthew Hale.]</p></li>
<li><p>See his scheme for the maintenance of the Poor, in Burn’s History of the Poor-laws. [This note appears first in ed. 2. Hale’s <i>Discourse Touching Provision for the Poor</i> was printed in 1683. It contains no internal evidence of the careful inquiry attributed to it above.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Davenant, <i>Essay upon the probable Methods of Making a People Gainers in the Balance of Trade,</i> 1699, pp. 15, 16; in <i>Works,</i> ed. Whitworth, vol. ii., p. 175.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Scheme D in Davenant, <i>Balance of Trade,</i> in <i>Works</i> Scheme B, vol. ii., p. 184. See below, p. 196, note.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Berkeley, <i>Querist,</i>
 5th ed., 1752, qu. 2, asks ‘whether a people can be called poor where
the common sort are well fed, clothed and lodged’. Hume, ‘On Commerce,’
says: ‘The greatness of a state and the happiness of its subjects,
however independent they may be supposed in some respects, are commonly
allowed to be inseparable with regard to commerce.’—<i>Political Discourses,</i> 1752, p. 4.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Cantillon, <i>Essai,</i>
 pt. 1., ch. ix., title, ‘Le nombre de laboureurs, artisans et autres
qui travaillent dans un état se proportionne naturellement au besoin
qu’on en a.’]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘If it’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Berkeley, <i>Querist,</i>
 qu. 62, asks ‘whether a country inhabited by people well fed, clothed
and lodged would not become every day more populous? And whether a
numerous stock of people in such circumstances would not constitute a
flourishing nation?’]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘tear and wear’ here and in the three other cases where the phrase is used on this page.]</p></li>
<li><p>[This is a more favourable view than that taken in <i>Lectures,</i> p. 257.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>De morbis artificum diatriba,</i> 1700, translated into English (<i>A Treatise on the Diseases of Tradesmen</i>) by R. James, 1746.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Misprinted ‘taillies’ in eds. 3-5.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Recherches
 sur la population des généralités d’Auvergne, de Lyon, de Rouen, et de
quelques provinces et villes du royaume, avec des réflexions sur la
valeur du bled tant en France qu’en Angleterre, depuis</i> 1674 <i>jusqu’en</i> 1764, par M. Messance, receveur des tailles de l’élection de Saint-Etienne, 1766, pp. 287-292, 305-308.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘continued to do so’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed.
 1 reads ‘that the increase of its price does not compensate the
diminution of its quantity’. The meaning is that the increase in the
amount paid for a given quantity of labour is more than counterbalanced
by the diminution in the quantity required. The statement is repeated
below, p. 242.]</p></li>
<li><p>[This
 statement is somewhat amplified below, p. 335, where the increasing
intensity of the competition between the owners of capital is attributed
 to the gradually increasing difficulty of finding ‘a profitable method
of employing any new capital’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Defined above, p. 54.]</p></li>
<li><p>[But that interest will not always bear the same proportion to profit is recognised below, pp. 98, 99.]</p></li>
<li><p>[C.
 9, ‘an act against usury’. On the ground that previous Acts and laws
had been obscure it repeals them all, and prohibits the repurchase of
goods sold within three months before, and the obtaining by any device
more than 10 per cent. per annum for forbearing payment of money. Its
real effect was to legalise interest up to 10 per cent.]</p></li>
<li><p>[5
 &amp; 6 Ed. VI., c. 20, forbade all interest, and repealed 37 Hen.
VIII., c. 9, alleging in its preamble that that Act was not intended to
allow usury, as ‘divers persons blinded with inordinate love of
themselves’ imagined, but was intended against all usury, ‘and yet
nevertheless the same was by the said act permitted for the avoiding of a
 more ill and inconvenience that before that time was used’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[On
 the ground that 5 &amp; 6 Ed. VI., c. 20, ‘hath not done so much good
as was hoped it should but rather the said vice of usury and especially
by way of sale of wares and shifts of interest hath much more
exceedingly abounded to the utter undoing of many gentlemen, merchants,
occupiers and other’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[C.
 17, which alleges that the fall of prices which had taken place made
the maintenance of ‘so high a rate’ as 10 per cent. prejudicial to
agriculture and commerce, and therefore reduces the maximum to 8 per
cent. for the future. It concludes with the very empty proviso that ‘no
words in this law contained shall be construed or expounded to allow the
 practice of usury in point of religion or conscience’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[It
 had already been so reduced by a Commonwealth Act of Parliament, passed
 in August, 1651, which adopts the reasons given by 21 Jac. I., c. 17.
But of course this, like other Acts of the Commonwealth, had to be
ignored by the Restoration Parliament, which, by 12 Car. II., c. 13,
re-made the reduction on the grounds that the abatement of interest from
 10 per cent. ‘in former times hath been found by notable experience
beneficial to the advancement of trade and improvement of lands by good
husbandry, with many other considerable advantages to this nation,
especially the reducing of it to a nearer proportion with foreign states
 with whom we traffic,’ and because ‘in fresh memory the like fall from
eight to six in the hundred by a late constant practice hath found the
like success to the general contentment of this nation as is visible by
several improvements,’ while ‘it is the endeavour of some at present to
reduce it back again in practice to the allowance of the statute still
in force to eight in the hundred to the great discouragement of
ingenuity and industry in the husbandry trade and commerce of this
nation.’]</p></li>
<li><p>[By
 12 Ann. st. 2, c. 16, which speaks of the benefit to trade and
agriculture resulting from the earlier reductions, of the burdens which
the war had laid on landowners, and of the decay of foreign trade owing
to the high interest and profit of money at home, which things made it
‘absolutely necessary to reduce the high rate of interest’ to a nearer
proportion with the interest allowed in foreign states.]</p></li>
<li><p>[That of 1756-1763.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Holders
 of 4 per cent. annuities who declined to accept in exchange new stock
bearing interest for some years at 3½ and afterwards at 3 per cent. were
 paid off by means of money raised by a 3 per cent. loan in 1750. See
Sinclair, <i>History of the Public Revenue,</i> 1785,
 pt. ii., p. 113. From that time till the beginning of 1755 the 3 per
cents. were usually above par. Then they gradually sank to 63 in
January, 1762; rose to 96 in March, 1763; fell again to 80 in October,
1764; after that they were seldom above 90 before the publication of the
 <i>Wealth of Nations</i> (Sinclair, <i>op. cit.,</i> pt. iii., 1790, Appendix iii.). The policy of a legal regulation of interest is discussed below, pp. 338, 339.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Below, pp. 326, 327.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, p. 78.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Below, p. 190.]</p></li>
<li><p>See Denisart, Article Taux des Interets, tom. iii. p. 18. [J. B. Denisart, <i>Collection de décisions nouvelles et de notions relatives à la jurisprudence actuelle,</i> 7th ed., 1771, <i>s.v.</i> Intérêt, subdivision Taux des Intérêts. This does not go so far as the reduction of 1766. The note appears first in ed. 2.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Below, p. 339.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Postlethwayt, <i>Dictionary of Commerce,</i> 2nd ed., 1757, vol. i., p. 877, <i>s.v.</i>
 Funds, says that the amount of British funds held by foreigners has
been estimated by some at one-fifth and by others at one-fourth of the
whole debt. But Magens, <i>Universal Merchant</i>
(ed. Horsley), 1753, p. 13, thought it ‘more than probable that
foreigners are not concerned in anything like one-fourth’. He had been
informed ‘that most of the money which the Dutch have here is in Bank,
East India and South Sea stocks, and that their interest in them might
amount to one-third of the whole’. Fairman, <i>Account of the Public Funds,</i>
 7th ed., 1824, p. 229, quotes ‘an account drawn up in the year 1762,
showing how much of the several funds transferable at the Bank of
England then stood in the names of foreigners,’ which is also in
Sinclair, <i>History of the Public Revenue,</i> pt.
iii., 1790, p. 366. From this it appears that foreigners held £4,627,858
 of Bank stock and £10,328,537 in the other funds, which did not include
 South Sea and East India stock. Fairman had reason to believe that the
South Sea holding amounted to £2,500,000 and the East Indian to more
than £500,000, which would make in all about £18,000,000. In 1806, he
says, the total claiming exemption from income tax (foreigners were
exempt) was £18,500,000, but this did not include Bank stock.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Eds. 1-3 read ‘lands’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, pp. 66-70.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Below, pp. 313-331.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Below, pp. 327, 328; vol. ii., p. 414.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Eds. 1 and 2 read ‘cheaper’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘five and forty,’ 8 having probably been misread as 5.</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Ad Atticum,</i>
 VI., i., 5, 6. Cicero had arranged that a six-year-old debt should be
repaid with interest at the rate of 12 per cent. per annum, the
principal being increased by that amount for each of the six years. This
 would have very nearly doubled the principal, but Brutus, through his
agent, kept asking for 48 per cent., which would have multiplied it by
more than fifteen. However, Cicero asserted that the 12 per cent. would
have satisfied the cruellest usurers.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Lectures,</i> pp. 130-134.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>I.e.,</i> the danger of evading the law.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Esprit des lois,</i>
 liv. xxii., ch. 19, ‘L’usure augmente dans les pays mahométans à
proportion de la sévérité de la défense: le prêteur s’indemnise du péril
 de la contravention. Dans ces pays d’Orient, la plupart des hommes
n’ont rien d’assuré; il n’y a presque point de rapport entre la
possession actuelle d’une somme et l’espérance de la ravoir après
l’avoir prêtée: l’usure y augmente donc à proportion du péril de
l’insolvabilité.’]</p></li>
<li><p>[Joshua Gee, <i>Trade and Navigation of Great Britain Considered,</i> 1729, p. 128, notices the fact of the Dutch being all engaged in trade and ascribes it to the deficiency of valuable land.]</p></li>
<li><p>[See below, vol. ii., pp. 138, 139.]</p></li>
<li><p>[According
 to the view of the subject here set forth, if the three employers each
spend £100 in wages and materials, and profits are at first 5 per cent.
and then rise to 10 per cent., the finished commodity must rise from
£331 os. 3d. to £364 2s., while if, on the other hand, the wages rise
from £100 to £105, the commodity will only rise to £347 11s. 3d. It is
assumed either that profits mean profits on turn-over and not on capital
 per annum, or else that the employers each have their capital turned
over once a year. But even when one or other of these assumptions is
granted, it is clear that the ‘simple interest’ may easily be greater
than the ‘compound’. In the examples just given we doubled profits, but
only added one-twentieth to wages. If we double wages and leave profits
at 5 per cent., the commodity should rise from £331 os. 3d. to £662 os.
6d.]</p></li>
<li><p>[This
 paragraph is not in ed. 1; the epigram at the end, however, did not
make its appearance here for the first time in ed. 2, since it occurs in
 a slightly less polished form in vol. ii., p. 100.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The general design of this chapter, as well as many of its details, was doubtless suggested by Cantillon, <i>Essai,</i>
 pt. 1, chaps. vii. and viii. The first of these chapters is headed: ‘Le
 travail d’un laboureur vaut moins que celui d’un artisan,’ and the
second: ‘Les artisans gagnent les uns plus les autres moins selon les
cas et les circonstances différentes.’ The second ends thus: ‘Par ces
inductions et cent autres qu’on pourrait tirer de l’expérience
ordinaire, on peut voir facilement que la différence de prix qu’on paie
pour le travail journalier est fondée sur des raisons naturelles et
sensibles.’]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘either evidently’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above pp. 58, 64.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The
 foregoing introductory paragraphs would lead a logical reader to expect
 part 1 of the chapter to be entitled: ‘Inequalities of pecuniary wages
and profit which merely counterbalance inequalities of other advantages
and disadvantages.’ The rather obscure title actually chosen is due to
the fact that nearly a quarter of the part is occupied by a discussion
of three further conditions which must be present in addition to
‘perfect freedom’ in order to bring about the equality of total
advantages and disadvantages. The chapter would have been clearer if
this discussion had been placed at the beginning, but it was probably an
 afterthought.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Below, pp. 107, 108.]</p></li>
<li><p>See Idyllium xxi. [This merely describes the life of two poor fishermen. The note appears first in ed. 2.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘its’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Below, p. 128.]</p></li>
<li><p>[This argument seems to be modelled closely on Cantillon, <i>Essai,</i> pp. 23, 24, but probably also owes something to Mandeville, <i>Fable of the Bees,</i> pt. ii., dialogue vi., vol. ii., p. 423. Cp. <i>Lectures,</i> pp. 173-175.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The
 ‘ought’ is equivalent to ‘it is reasonable they should be’ in the
previous paragraph, and to ‘must’ in ‘must not only maintain him while
he is idle’ on p. 105. Cp. ‘doivent’ in Cantillon, <i>Essai,</i>
 p. 24: ‘Ceux donc qui emploient des artisans ou gens de métier, doivent
 nécessairement payer leur travail plus haut que celui d’un laboureur ou
 manœuvre.’ The meaning need not be that it is ethically right that a
person on whose education much has been spent should receive a large
reward, but only that it is economically desirable, since otherwise
there would be a deficiency of such persons.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The
 treatment of this head would have been clearer if it had begun with a
distinction between ‘day-wages’ (mentioned lower down on the page) and
annual earnings. The first paragraph of the argument claims that annual
earnings as well as day-wages will be higher in the inconstant
employment so as to counterbalance the disadvantage or repulsive force
of having ‘anxious and desponding moments’. In the subsequent
paragraphs, however, this claim is lost sight of, and the discussion
proceeds as if the thesis was that annual earnings are equal though
day-wages may be unequal.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Below, p. 143.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Misprinted ‘effect’ in ed. 5.]</p></li>
<li><p>[That
 ‘stock’ consists of actual objects seems to be overlooked here. The
constancy with which such objects can be employed is various: the
constancy with which the hearse of a village is employed depends on the
number of deaths, which may be said to be ‘the trade,’ and is certainly
not ‘the trader’. There is no difference of profits corresponding to
differences of day-wages due to unequal constancy of employment, for the
 simple reason that ‘profits’ are calculated by their amount per annum,
but the rural undertaker, liable to long interruption of business in
healthy seasons, may just as well as the bricklayer be supposed to
receive ‘some compensation for those anxious and desponding moments
which the thought of so precarious a situation must sometimes
occasion’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The
 argument foreshadowed in the introductory paragraphs of the chapter
requires an allegation that it is a disadvantage to a person to have
trust reposed in him, but no such allegation is made. Cantillon, <i>Essai,</i>
 p. 27, says: ‘lorsqu’il faut de la capacité et de la confiance, on paie
 encore le travail plus cher, comme aux jouailliers, teneurs de compte,
caissiers, et autres.’ Hume, <i>History,</i> ed. of
1773, vol. viii., p. 323, says: ‘It is a familiar rule in all business
that every man should be paid in proportion to the trust reposed in him
and the power which he enjoys.’]</p></li>
<li><p>[But some trades, <i>e.g.,</i>
 that of a banker, may be necessarily confined to persons of more than
average trustworthiness, and this may raise the rate of profit above the
 ordinary level if such persons are not sufficiently plentiful.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The
 argument under this head, which is often misunderstood, is that
pecuniary wages are (on the average, setting great gains against small
ones) less in trades where there are high prizes and many blanks. The
remote possibility of obtaining one of the high prizes is one of the
circumstances which ‘in the imaginations of men make up for a small
pecuniary gain’ (p. 101). Cantillon, <i>Essai,</i> p. 24, is not so subtle, merely making remuneration proportionate to risk.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Lectures,</i> p. 175.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Eds. 1-4 read ‘are’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘of it’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Eds. 4 and 5 read ‘their,’ doubtless a misprint.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The
 fact is overlooked that the numerous bankruptcies may be
counterbalanced by the instances of great gain. Below, on p. 127, the
converse mistake is made of comparing great successes and leaving out of
 account great failures.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, p. 55.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Doubtless Kirkcaldy was in Smith’s mind.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, p. 76.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, p. 60.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The illustration has already been used above, p. 61.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Under 13 and 14 Car. II., c. 5, § 18.]</p></li>
<li><p>[8 Eliz., c. 11, § 8; 1 Jac. I., c. 17, § 3; 5 Geo. II., c. 22.]</p></li>
<li><p>[But
 8 Eliz., c. 11, was enacted ‘at the lamentable suit and complaint’ not
of the hatters but of the cap-makers, who alleged that they were being
impoverished by the excessive use of hats, which were made of foreign
wool, and the extension to the colonies of the restriction on
apprentices by 5 Geo. II., c. 22, was doubtless suggested by the English
 hatters’ jealousy of the American hatters, so that this regulation was
not dictated by quite the same spirit as the Sheffield by-law.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The
 preamble of 13 and 14 Car. II., c. 15, says that the company of silk
throwers in London were incorporated in 1629, and the preamble of 20
Car. II., c. 6, says that the trade had lately been obstructed because
the company had endeavoured to put into execution a certain by-law made
by them nearly forty years since, restricting the freemen to 160
spindles and the assistants to 240. The act 20 Car. II., c. 6,
accordingly declares this by-law void. It also enacts that ‘no by-law
already made or hereafter to be made by the said company shall limit the
 number of apprentices to less than three’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[‘In Italy a mestiere or company of artisans and tradesmen was sometimes styled an <i>ars</i> or <i>universitas.</i> . . . The company of mercers of Rome are styled <i>universitas merciariorum,</i> and the company of bakers there <i>universitas pistorum.</i>’—Madox, <i>Firma Burgi,</i> 1726, p. 32.]</p></li>
<li><p>[C. 4, § 31.]</p></li>
<li><p>[‘It
 hath been held that this statute doth not restrain a man from using
several trades, so as he had been an apprentice to all; wherefore it
indemnifies all petty chapmen in little towns and villages because their
 masters kept the same mixed trades before.’—Matthew Bacon, <i>New Abridgement of the Law,</i> 3rd ed., 1768, vol. iii., p. 553, <i>s.v.</i> Master and servant.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Ibid.,</i> vol. iii., p. 552.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Ibid.,</i> vol. i., p. 553.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Bacon (<i>ibid.,</i> iii., 553), however, says distinctly: ‘A coachmaker is within this statute,’ on the authority of Ventris’ <i>Reports,</i> p. 346.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Compagnon.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Compagnonnage.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Contrast with this the account of the origin of property in the <i>Lectures,</i> pp. 107-127.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Of Scotch manufacture, 10 Ann., c. 21; 13 Geo. I., c. 26.]</p></li>
<li><p>[39 Eliz., c. 20; 43 Eliz., c. 10, § 7.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The article on apprentices occupies twenty-four pages in Richard Burn’s <i>Justice of the Peace,</i> 1764.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The
 last two terms seem to be used rather contemptuously. Probably Smith
had fresh in his recollection the passage in which Madox ridicules as a
‘piece of puerility’ the use of the English word ‘misterie,’ derived
from ‘the Gallick word mestera, mistera and misteria,’ as if it
‘signified something μυστηριω̑δες, mysterious.’—<i>Firma Burgi,</i> 1726, pp. 33-35.]</p></li>
<li><p>See Madox Firma Burgi, p. 26, &amp;c. [This note appears first in ed. 2.]</p></li>
<li><p>[‘Peradventure
 from these secular gilds or in imitation of them sprang the method or
practice of gildating and embodying whole towns.’—Madox, <i>Firma Burgi,</i> p. 27.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The
 argument is unsound in the absence of any proof that the more numerous
successes are not counterbalanced by equally numerous failures; cp.
above p. 113, note.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Below, vol. ii., pp. 153, 154.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Descriptions des Arts et Métiers faites ou approuvées par Messieurs de l’Académie Royale des Sciences,</i> 1761-88.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Lectures,</i> p. 255.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Below, pp. 382-394.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘single member of it’ here and in the next line.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Eds. 4 and 5 erroneously insert ‘a’ here.]</p></li>
<li><p>[According to Richard Burn’s <i>Ecclesiastical Law,</i> 1763, <i>s.v.</i> Curates, six marks was the pay ordered by a constitution of Archbishop Islip till 1378, when it was raised to eight.]</p></li>
<li><p>See the Statute of labourers, 25 Ed. III. [Below, p. 177. The note is not in ed. 1.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The quotation is not intended to be <i>verbatim,</i> in spite of the inverted commas.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 does not contain ‘or private’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Hume, <i>History,</i>
 ed. of 1773, vol, iii., p. 403, quotes 11 Hen. VII., c. 22, which
forbids students to beg without permission from the chancellor.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Eds. 1-3 read ‘was’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[§§ 3, 4. A very free but not incorrect translation. Arbuthnot, <i>Tables of Ancient Coins, Weights and Measures,</i>
 2nd ed., 1754, p. 198, refers to but does not quote the passage as his
authority for stating the reward of a sophist at four or five minæ. He
treats the mina as equal to £3 4s. 7d., which at the rate of 62s. to the
 pound troy is considerably too low.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Plutarch, <i>Demosthenes,</i> c. v., § 3; <i>Isocrates,</i> § 30.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Arbuthnot, <i>Tables of Ancient Coins,</i>
 p. 198, says, ‘Isocrates had from his disciples a didactron or reward
of 1,000 minæ, £3,229 3s. 4d.,’ and quotes ‘Plut. in Isocrate,’ which
says nothing about a ‘didactron,’ but only that Isocrates charged ten
minæ and had 100 pupils.—§§ 9, 12, 30.]</p></li>
<li><p>[This story is from Pliny, <i>H. N.,</i>
 xxxiii., cap. iv., who remarks, ‘Tantus erat docendae oratoriae
quaestus,’ but the commentators point out that earlier authorities
ascribe the erection of the statue not to Gorgias, but to the whole of
Greece.]</p></li>
<li><p>[It is difficult to discover on what passage this statement is based.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Plutarch, <i>Alexander.</i>]</p></li>
<li><p>[This is a slip. Carneades was a native of Cyrene, and it was his colleague Diogenes who was a Babylonian by birth.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Below, vol. ii., pp. 249-261.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, p. 122.]</p></li>
<li><p>[15 Car. II., c. 15.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 does not contain ‘the’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 places the ‘is’ here.]</p></li>
<li><p>[C. 12.]</p></li>
<li><p>[This
 account of the provisions of the Acts regarding settlement, though not
incorrect, inverts the order of the ideas which prompted them. The
preamble complains that owing to defects in the law ‘poor people are not
 restrained from going from one parish to another, and therefore do
endeavour to settle themselves in those parishes where there is the best
 stock,’ and so forth, and the Act therefore gives the justices power,
‘within forty days after any such person or persons coming so to settle
as aforesaid,’ to remove them ‘to such parish where he or they were last
 legally settled either as a native, householder, sojourner, apprentice
or servant for the space of forty days at the least’. The use of the
term ‘settlement’ seems to have originated with this Act.]</p></li>
<li><p>[C.
 17, ‘An act for reviving and continuance of several acts’. The reason
given is that ‘such poor persons at their first coming to a parish do
commonly conceal themselves’. Nothing is said either here or in Burn’s <i>Poor Law</i> or <i>Justice of the Peace</i> about parish officers bribing their poor to go to another parish.]</p></li>
<li><p>[3 W. and M., c. 11, § 3.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Richard Burn, <i>Justice of the Peace,</i> 1764, vol. ii., p. 253.]</p></li>
<li><p>[§§ 6, 8.]</p></li>
<li><p>[§ 7 confines settlement by service to unmarried persons without children.]</p></li>
<li><p>[By 9 Geo. I., c. 7.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The
 Act, 13 &amp; 14 Car. II., c. 12, giving the justices power to remove
the immigrant within forty days was certainly obstructive to the free
circulation of labour, but the other statutes referred to in the text,
by making the attainment of a settlement more difficult, would appear to
 have made it less necessary for a parish to put in force the power of
removal, and therefore to have assisted rather than obstructed the free
circulation of labour. The poor law commissioners of 1834, long after
the power of removal had been abolished in 1795, found the law of
settlement a great obstruction to the free circulation of labour,
because men were afraid of gaining a new settlement, not because a new
settlement was denied them.]</p></li>
<li><p>[C.
 30, ‘An act for supplying some defects in the laws for the relief of
the poor of this kingdom’. The preamble recites, ‘Forasmuch as many poor
 persons chargeable to the parish, township or place where they live,
merely for want of work, would in any other place when sufficient
employment is to be had maintain themselves and families without being
burdensome to any parish, township or place’. But certificates were
invented long before this. The Act 13 &amp; 14 Car. II., c. 12, provides
 for their issue to persons going into another parish for harvest or any
 other kind of work, and the preamble of 8 &amp; 9 W. III., c. 30, shows
 that they were commonly given. Only temporary employment, however, was
contemplated, and, on the expiration of the job, the certificated person
 became removable.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Rather by the explanatory Act, 9 &amp; 10 W. III., c. 11.]</p></li>
<li><p>[All these statutes are conveniently collected in Richard Burn’s <i>History of the Poor Laws,</i> 1764, pp. 94-100.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Burn, <i>Justice of the Peace,</i> 1764, vol. ii., p. 274.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Burn, <i>History of the Poor Laws,</i>
 1764, pp. 235, 236, where it is observed that ‘it was the easy method
of obtaining a settlement by a residency of forty days that brought
parishes into a state of war against the poor and against one another,’
and that if settlement were reduced to the place of birth or of
inhabitancy for one or more years, certificates would be got rid of.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Burn, <i>Justice,</i> vol. ii., p. 209. The date given is 1730.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Since
 the fact of the father having no settlement would not free the parish
from the danger of having at some future time to support the children.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Some evidence in support of this assertion would have been acceptable. Sir Frederic M. Eden, <i>State of the Poor,</i> 1797, vol. i., pp. 296-298, may be consulted on the other side. William Hay’s <i>Remarks on the Laws Relating to the Poor,</i>
 1735, which Eden regards as giving a very exaggerated view of the
obstruction caused by the law of settlement, was in the Edinburgh
Advocates’ Library in 1776, and Adam Smith may have seen it.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>History of the Poor Laws,</i>
 p. 130, loosely quoted. After ‘limitation’ the passage runs, ‘as
thereby it leaves no room for industry or ingenuity; for if all persons
in the same kind of work were to receive equal wages there would be no
emulation.’]</p></li>
<li><p>[7
 Geo. I., stat. 1, c. 13, was passed, according to its preamble, because
 journeymen tailors had lately departed from their service without just
cause, and had entered into ‘combinations to advance their wages to
unreasonable prices, and lessen their usual hours of work, which is of
evil example, and manifestly tends to the prejudice of trade, to the
encouragement of idleness, and to the great increase of the poor’. It
prescribed hours, 6 <span class="sc">a.m.</span> to 8 <span class="sc">p.m.,</span>
 and wages, 2s. a day in the second quarter and 1s. 8d. for the rest of
the year. Quarter sessions might alter the rates. This Act was amended
by 8 Geo. III., c. 17, under which the hours were to be 6 <span class="sc">a.m.</span> to 7 <span class="sc">p.m.,</span>
 and wages a maximum of 2s. 7½d. a day. Masters inside the area were
forbidden to pay more to workers outside the area than was allowed by
the Act within it.]</p></li>
<li><p>[1
 Ann., stat. 2, c. 18, applied to workmen in the woollen, linen,
fustian, cotton and iron manufacture; 13 Geo. II., c. 8, to
manufacturers of gloves, boots, shoes and other leather wares. The
second of these Acts only prohibits truck payments when made without the
 request and consent of the workmen.]</p></li>
<li><p>[C. 29.]</p></li>
<li><p>[C. 6. The preamble relates the defect.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, p. 65.]</p></li>
<li><p>[‘By’ appears first in ed. 3.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Eds.
 1 and 2 read ‘The rent of land varies with its fertility, whatever be
its produce, and with its situation, whatever be its fertility.’]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, p. 91.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Vol. i., p. 532, in the French translation of Juan and Ulloa’s work, <i>Voyage historique de l’Amérique méridionale par don George Juan et don Antoine de Ulloa,</i>
 1752. The statement is repeated in almost the same words, substituting
‘three or four hundred’ for ‘two or three hundred,’ below, p. 186.]</p></li>
<li><p>[See below, pp. 163 and 219.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Cicero, <i>De officiis,</i> lib. ii. <i>ad fin.</i> Quoted in <i>Lectures,</i> p. 229.]</p></li>
<li><p>[See below, pp. 217, 218.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>The Life of Henry Prince of Wales,</i> by Thomas Birch, D.D., 1760, p. 346.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Ibid.,</i> p. 271.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>A Report from the Committee who, upon the</i> 8<i>th day of February,</i> 1764, <i>were appointed to inquire into the Causes of the High Price of Provisions with the proceedings of the House thereupon.</i>
 Published by order of the House of Commons, 1764, paragraph 4, where,
however, there is no definite statement to the effect that the Virginia
merchant, Mr. Capel Hanbury, considered 24s. or 25s. as the ordinary
price.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Report from the Committee,</i> paragraph 3 almost <i>verbatim.</i>
 The Committee resolved ‘that the high price of provisions of late has
been occasioned partly by circumstances peculiar to the season and the
year, and partly by the defect of the laws in force for convicting and
punishing all persons concerned in forestalling cattle in their passage
to market.’]</p></li>
<li><p>[These prices are deduced from the tables at the end of the chapter.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Only if the extra risk deters people from entering the business, and according to pp. 112, 113 above it would not.</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘thorns’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Columella, <i>De re rustica,</i> xi., 3, but the recommendation of the fence is ‘Et haec quidem claudendi horti ratio maxime est antiquis probata’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Gesnerus’ edition of Columella in <i>Scriptores rei rusticae</i> in Adam Smith’s library (see Bonar’s <i>Catalogue, s.v.</i> Gesnerus), commenting on the passage referred to above, quotes the opinions of Varro, <i>De re rustica,</i> i., 14, and Palladius, <i>De re rustica,</i> i., 34.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>De re rustica,</i> iii., 3.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘their’.]</p></li>
<li><p>Voyages d’un Philosophe [<i>ou observations sur les mœurs et les arts des peuples de l’Afrique, de l’Asie, et de l’Amérique,</i> 1768, pp. 92, 93. The note appears first in ed. 2].</p></li>
<li><p>[The
 French original says the Cochin-China quintal ‘équivaut à 150L. 200 de
nos livres, poids de marc,’ which cannot possibly bear the meaning
ascribed to it in the text. Probably the 150L. are pounds equal to 1⅓ of
 the pounds poids de marc. This would make the cwt. English worth only
about seven shillings.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Tobacco
 growing in England, Ireland, and the Channel Islands was prohibited by
12 Car. II., c. 34, the preamble of which alleges that the lords and
commons have considered ‘of how great concern and importance it is that
the colonies and plantations of this kingdom in America be defended,
maintained and kept up, and that all due and possible encouragement be
given unto them, and that not only in regard great and considerable
dominions and countries have been thereby gained and added to the
imperial crown of this realm, but for that the strength and welfare of
this kingdom do very much depend upon them in regard of the employment
of a very considerable part of its shipping and seamen, and of the vent
of very great quantities of its native commodities and manufactures as
also of its supply with several considerable commodities which it was
wont formerly to have only from foreigners and at far dearer rates, and
forasmuch as tobacco is one of the main products of several of those
plantations and upon which their welfare and subsistence and the
navigation of this kingdom and vent of its commodities thither do much
depend; And in regard it is found by experience that the tobaccos
planted in these parts are not so good and wholesome for the takers
thereof, and that by the planting thereof Your Majesty is deprived of a
considerable part of your revenue.’ The prohibition was extended to
Scotland by 22 Geo III., c. 73.]</p></li>
<li><p>[William Douglass, M.D., <i>A
 Summary, Historical and Political, of the First Planting, Progressive
Improvements and Present State of the British Settlements in North
America,</i> 1760, vol. ii., pp. 359, 360 and 373.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Ibid.,</i> p. 374, but the phrase is ‘an industrious man’ not ‘such a negro’.]</p></li>
<li><p>Douglas’s Summary, vol. ii. p. 372, 373. [This note appears first in ed. 2. In the text of ed. 1 the name is spelt ‘Douglass’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[This
 saying about the Dutch and spices is repeated below, vol. ii., p. 26,
and again p. 135. Douglass, vol. ii., p. 372, in a note to the statement
 that Virginia and Maryland occasionally produce more than they can sell
 to advantage, which immediately precedes his account of the occasional
burning of tobacco, says: ‘This is sometimes the case with the Dutch
East India spices and the West India sugars.’]</p></li>
<li><p>[The inferiority of oatmeal has already been asserted above, p. 77.]</p></li>
<li><p>[This ‘always’ is qualified almost to the extent of contradiction on p. 165, below.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘thither’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, p. 150, and below, p. 219.]</p></li>
<li><p>[This and the two preceding paragraphs appear to be based on the dissertation on the natural wants of mankind in <i>Lectures,</i> pp. 157-161; cp. <i>Moral Sentiments,</i> 1759, p. 349.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Misprinted ‘labourer’ in ed. 5.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘if it can conveniently get coals for fewel’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The
 North Bridge was only made passable in 1772: in 1778 the buildings
along Princes Street had run to a considerable length, and St. Andrew’s
Square and the streets connected with it were almost complete. A plan of
 that date shows the whole block between Queen Street and Princes Street
 (Arnot, <i>History of Edinburgh,</i> 1779, pp. 233, 315, 318, 319).]</p></li>
<li><p>[Buchanan (ed. of <i>Wealth of Nations,</i>
 vol. i., p. 279), commenting on this passage, remarks judiciously: ‘It
is not by the produce of one coal mine, however fertile, but by the
joint produce of all the coal mines that can be worked, that the price
of coals is fixed. A certain quantity of coals only can be consumed at a
 certain price. If the mines that can be worked produce more than this
quantity the price will fall; if they produce less it will rise.’]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘depends frequently’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘article in the commerce of Europe’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Natural History of Cornwall,</i> by William Borlase, 1758, p. 175, but nothing is there said as to the landlord sometimes receiving more than one-sixth.]</p></li>
<li><p>[‘Those
 who are willing to labour themselves easily obtain of the miner a vein
to work on; what they get out of it is their own, paying him the King’s
duty and the hire of the mill, which is so considerable that some are
satisfied with the profit it yields without employing any to work for
them in the mines.’—Frezier, <i>Voyage to the South Sea and along the Coasts of Chili and Peru in the Years</i> 1712, 1713 <i>and</i> 1714, <i>with a Postscript by Dr. Edmund Halley,</i> 1717, p. 109. For Ulloa see below, p. 171, note.]</p></li>
<li><p>[In
 place of these two sentences ed. 1 reads, ‘The tax of the King of
Spain, indeed, amounts to one-fifth of the standard silver, which may be
 considered as the real rent of the greater part of the silver mines of
Peru, the richest which are known in the world. If there was no tax,
this fifth would naturally belong to the landlord, and many mines might
be wrought which cannot be wrought at present, because they cannot
afford this tax.’]</p></li>
<li><p>[The sum of more than £10,000 paid on £190,954 worth of produce is mentioned by Borlase. The duty was 4s. per cwt.—<i>Natural History of Cornwall,</i> p. 183.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘is’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The
 reduction is mentioned again below, pp. 201, 214. Ed. 1 does not
contain this sentence, and begins the next with ‘The high tax upon
silver, too, gives much greater temptation to smuggling than the low tax
 upon tin’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[‘Quand
 un homme témoigne avoir dessein de fouiller dans quelque mine, les
autres le regardent comme un extravagant qui court à sa perte, et qui
risque une ruine certaine pour des espérances éloignées et
très-douteuses. Ils tâchent de le détourner de son dessein, et s’ils n’y
 peuvent réussir, ils le fuyent en l’évitant, comme s’ils craignaient
qu’il ne leur communiquât son mal.’—<i>Voyage historique de l’Amérique méridionale par don George Juan et par don Antoine de Ulloa,</i>
 1752, tom. i., p. 379. The statement relates to the province of Quito,
and the condition of things is contrasted with that prevailing in Peru
proper. For Frezier see next page, note 4.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Frezier, <i>Voyage,</i> p. 109.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Borlase, <i>Natural History of Cornwall,</i>
 pp. 167, 175. If the land was ‘bounded’ (bounding could only take place
 on ‘wastrel or common’) the lord of the soil received only a
fifteenth.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘It was once a fifth, as in silver, but it was found the work could not bear it.’]</p></li>
<li><p>[‘It is more rare to see a gold miner rich than a silver miner or of any other metal.’—Frezier, <i>Voyage,</i>
 p. 108. There seems nothing in either Frezier or Ulloa to indicate that
 they took the gloomy view of the prospects of the gold and silver miner
 which is ascribed to them in the text. From this and the curious way in
 which they are coupled together, here and above (pp. 169, 170), and
also the fact that no mention is made of the title of either of their
books, it seems probable that Smith is quoting from memory or from notes
 which had become mixed. It is possible that he confused Frezier with
Ulloa’s collaborator, Don George Juan, but Ulloa is quoted without
Frezier above, p. 149, and below, p. 186.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>The Six Voyages of John Baptista Tavernier, a noble man of France now living, through Turkey into Persia and the East Indies,</i>
 translated by J. P., 1678, does not appear to contain any such
statement. Possibly it is merely founded on Tavernier’s remark that
‘there was a mine discovered between Coulour and Raolconda, which the
King caused to be shut up again by reason of some cheats that were used
there; for they found therein that sort of stones which had this green
outside, fair and transparent, and which appeared more fair than the
others, but when they came to the mill they crumbled to pieces’ (pt.
ii., p. 138). In eds. 4 and 5 ‘yielded’ is misprinted ‘yield’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘seems’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The
 evidence for this statement, which does not agree with the figures in
the table at the end of the chapter, is given in the next eleven
paragraphs.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Already quoted above, p. 132.]</p></li>
<li><p>[It
 speaks of the Act of 1349, which ordered a continuance of wages at the
level of 20 Edward III., and five or six years before (1347 or 1348 to
1353), as having been passed ‘against the malice of servants which were
idle and not willing to serve after the pestilence without taking
excessive wages,’ and gives as the reason for new provisions ‘forasmuch
as it is given the King to understand in this present Parliament by the
petition of the commonalty that the said servants having no regard to
the said ordinance, but to their ease and singular covetise, do withdraw
 themselves to serve great men and other, unless they have livery and
wages to the double or treble of that they were wont to take the said
twentieth year and before, to the great damage of the great men and
impoverishing of all the said commonalty, whereof the said commonalty
prayeth remedy.’]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>I.e.,</i> four years before the twentieth year.]</p></li>
<li><p>[This
 and the other reductions of ancient money to the eighteenth century
standard are probably founded on the table in Martin Folkes, <i>Table of English Silver Coins,</i> 1745, p. 142.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>E.g.,</i> Fleetwood’s prices in the table at the end of the chapter.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Fleetwood, <i>Chronicon Preciosum,</i> 1707, pp. 83-85.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The
 date 1262 is wrong, as 51 Hen. III. ran from October 28, 1266, to
October 27, 1267. But the editions of the statutes which ascribe the
statute to 51 Hen. III. appear to have no good authority for doing so;
see <i>Statutes of the Realm,</i> vol. i., p. 199, notes. The statute has already been quoted above, p. 28, and is quoted again below, p. 183.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘very far wrong’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>The
 Regulations and Establishment of the Houshold of Henry Algernon Percy,
the fifth Earl of Northumberland, at his castles of Wresill and
Lekinfield in Yorkshire, begun anno domini MDXII.,</i> 1770, pp. 2,
4, but there are not really two estimations. It seems clear that ‘vs.
viijd.’ on p. 4 is merely a misprint or mistake for ‘vis. viijd.,’ since
 118 qrs. 2 bushels are reckoned at £39 8s. 4d.]</p></li>
<li><p>[15 Hen. VI., c. 2.]</p></li>
<li><p>[3 Ed. IV., c. 2.]</p></li>
<li><p>[1 and 2 P. and M., c. 5, § 7. Licences for exportation, however, are recognised by the Act.]</p></li>
<li><p>[1
 Eliz., c. 11, § 11, which, however, merely partially exempts Norfolk
and Suffolk from regulations intended to prevent exportation from places
 where no custom-house existed.]</p></li>
<li><p>[5 Eliz., c. 5, § 17.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Neither his <i>Recherches sur la valeur des Monnoies et sur les prix des grains avant et après le concile de Francfort,</i> 1762, nor his <i>Essai sur les Monnoies, ou réflexions sur le rapport entre l’argent et les denrées,</i> 1746, contain any clear justification for this reference.]</p></li>
<li><p>[From 1446 to 1515 ‘le blé fut plus bas que dans les siècles précédents’.—<i>Essai sur la police générale des grains sur leur prix et sur les effets de l’agriculture,</i> 1755 (by C. J. Herbert), pp. 259, 260.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘with the tenant’ here and omits ‘of the tenant’ in next line.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘rent at the price of the fiars of each year rather’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Chronicon Preciosum,</i>
 1707, pp. 121, 122. Fleetwood does not ‘acknowledge’ any ‘mistake,’ but
 says that though the price was not the market price it might have been
‘well agreed upon’. His ‘particular purpose’ was to prove that in order
to qualify for a fellowship a man might conscientiously swear his income
 to be much less than it was.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The statement is too sweeping. See <i>Statutes of the Realm,</i> vol. i., pp. xxiv and 199, notes. Ruffhead’s edition began to be published in 1762.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Judicium Pillorie, temp. incert., ascribed to 51 Hen. III., stat. 6.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Eds. 1 and 2 read ‘Rudiman’.]</p></li>
<li><p>See his preface to Anderson’s Diplomata Scotiae. [<i>Selectus diplomatum et numismatum Scotiae thesaurus,</i>] 1739, p. 82, and in the translation, <i>An Introduction to Mr. James Anderson’s</i> Diplomata Scotiae, by Thomas Ruddiman, M.A., Edinburgh, 1773, pp. 170, 174, 228. The note appears first in ed. 2.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The
 manuscript appears to be the Alexander Foulis MS., now 25. 4. 10. in
the Edinburgh Advocates’ Library, No. viii. of the MSS., described in <i>Acts of the Parliaments of Scotland,</i>
 vol. i. The exact words are ‘Memorandum quod reliqua judicabis secundum
 praedicta habendo respectum ad praescripta bladi precium duplicando.’]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Chronicon Preciosum,</i> p. 78. Fleetwood quotes the author of <i>Antiq. Britan.</i> in <i>Vita Joh. Pecham</i> as saying that ‘provisions were so scarce that parents did eat their own children’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Eds. 1 to 3 read ‘variations’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[See the table, pp. 250-254 below.]</p></li>
<li><p>[This appears to be merely an inference from the fact that he does not take notice of fluctuations.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, p. 181.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘that’ instead of ‘because,’ here and also two lines above.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Voyage historique de l’Amérique méridionale,</i> vol. i., p. 552, where, however, the number of cattle is two or three hundred, as correctly quoted above, p. 149.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Narrative
 of the Hon. John Byron, containing an account of the Great Distresses
suffered by himself and his companions on the Coast of Patagonia from</i> 1740 <i>to</i> 1746, 1768, pp. 212, 220.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Misprinted ‘improved’ in ed. 5.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, p. 40.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘had they not been agreeable to the popular notion’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, p. 92.]</p></li>
<li><p>[This sentence is not in ed. 1.]</p></li>
<li><p>[In 1545. Ed. 1 reads ‘thirty’ instead of ‘twenty’. In ed. 2 the correction is in the errata. See below p. 201, notes 4 and 5.]</p></li>
<li><p>[See the table at the end of the chapter, p. 255.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The deduction of this ninth is recommended by Charles Smith, <i>Three Tracts on the Corn Trade and Corn Laws,</i>
 2nd ed., 1766, p. 104, because, ‘it hath been found tha the value of
all the wheat fit for bread, if mixed together, would be eight-ninths of
 the value of the best wheat.’]</p></li>
<li><p>[By
 1 W. &amp; M., c. 12, ‘An act for the encouraging the exportation of
corn,’ the preamble of which alleges that ‘it hath been found by
experience, that the exportation of corn and grain into foreign parts,
when the price thereof is at a low rate in this kingdom, hath been a
great advantage not only to the owners of land but to the trade of this
kingdom in general.’ It provides that when malt or barley does not
exceed 24s. per Winchester quarter, rye 32s. and wheat 48s. in any port,
 every person exporting such corn on an English ship with a crew at
least two-thirds English shall receive from the Customs 2s. 6d. for
every quarter of barley or malt, 3s. 6d. for every quarter of rye and
5s. for every quarter of wheat.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Below, vol. ii., pp. 8-18.]</p></li>
<li><p>[In
 place of ‘How far the bounty could produce this effect at any time I
shall examine hereafter: I shall only observe at present that,’ ed. 1
reads simply ‘But’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[For ‘not’ ed. 1 reads ‘no,’ and for ‘any such’ it reads ‘this’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The
 Act 10 Will. III., c. 3, prohibits exportation for one year from 10th
February, 1699. The mistake ‘nine months’ is probably due to a
misreading of C. Smith, <i>Tracts on the Corn Trade,</i>
 p. 9, wheat ‘growing, and continuing dearer till 1698, the exportation
was forbid for one year, and then for nine months the bounty was
suspended’ (cp. pp. 44, 119). As a matter of fact, the bounty was
suspended by 11 &amp; 12 Will. III., c. 1, from 9th February, 1699, to
29th September, 1700, or not much more than seven months and a half. The
 Act 11 &amp; 12 Will. III., c. 1, alleges that the Act granting the
bounty [was grounded upon the highest wisdom and prudence and has
succeeded to the greatest benefit and advantage to the nation by the
greatest encouragement of tillage,’ and only suspends it because ‘it
appears that the present stock and quantity of corn in this kingdom may
not be sufficient for the use and service of the people at home should
there be too great an exportation into parts beyond the seas, which many
 persons may be prompted to do for their own private advantage and the
lucre of the said bounty.’—<i>Statutes of the Realm,</i> vol. vii., p. 544.]</p></li>
<li><p>[For ‘debasement’ ed. 1 reads ‘degradation’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Lowndes says on p. 107 of his <i>Report Containing an Essay for the Amendment of the Silver Coins,</i>
 1695, ‘the moneys commonly current are diminished near one-half, to
wit, in a proportion something greater than that of ten to twenty-two’.
But in the text above, the popular estimate, as indicated by the price
of silver bullion, is accepted, as in the next paragraph.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘degraded’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[See above, p. 43.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Lowndes, <i>Essay,</i> p. 88.]</p></li>
<li><p>Lowndes’s Essay on the Silver Coin, p. 68. [This note appears first in ed. 2.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, p. 43.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The meaning is ‘given a certain area and intensity of cultivation, the bounty will raise the price of corn’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed.
 1 does not contain ‘upon the principles of a system which I shall
explain hereafter’. The reference is presumably to vol. ii., pp. 8-18.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads here ‘a notion which I shall examine hereafter’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Doubtless by a misprint ed. 5 omits ‘first’. The term is used again at the end of the paragraph and also on pp. 197, 198.]</p></li>
<li><p>[See the table at the end of the chapter; 19/32 is a mistake for 9/32.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The
 25 per cent. is erroneously reckoned on the £2 os. 6 19/32d. instead of
 on the £2 11s. old. The fall of price is really less than 21 per cent.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The date is taken from the heading of Scheme D in Davenant, <i>Essay upon the Probable Means of Making a People Gainers in the Balance of Trade,</i> 1699, p. 22, <i>Works,</i> ed. Whitworth, 1771, vol. ii., p. 184. Cp. <i>Natural and Political Observations and Conclusions upon the State and Condition of England,</i> by Gregory King, Esq., Lancaster, H., in George Chalmers’ <i>Estimate of the Comparative Strength of Great Britain,</i> 1802, p. 429; in Davenant, <i>Balance of Trade,</i> pp. 71, 72, <i>Works,</i>
 vol. ii., p. 217. Davenant says ‘this value is what the same is worth
upon the spot where the corn grew; but this value is increased by the
carriage to the place where it is at last spent, at least ¼ part more.’]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 does not contain this parenthesis.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, p. 193, note.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 5, doubtless by a misprint, omits ‘even’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Below, vol. ii., pp. 8-18.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The references to Dupré de St. Maur and the <i>Essay</i> (see above, p. 181, note), as well as the whole argument of the paragraph, are from Messance, <i>Recherches sur la population des généralités d’Auvergne,</i> etc., p. 281. Messance’s quotations are from Dupré’s <i>Essai sur les Monnoies,</i> 1746, p. 68, and Herbert’s <i>Essai sur la police générale des grains,</i> 1755, pp. ix, 77, 189; cp. below, p. 240.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, pp. 37, 38.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Examined below, p. 216.]</p></li>
<li><p>[See the table at the end of the chapter.]</p></li>
<li><p>[This figure is obtained, as recommended by Charles Smith (<i>Tracts on the Corn Trade,</i>
 1766, p. 104), by deducting one-ninth for the greater size of the
Windsor measure and one-ninth from the remainder for the difference
between best and middling wheat.]</p></li>
<li><p>[‘Tract
 3d,’ referred to a few lines farther on, only gives the quantities of
each kind of grain exported in each year (pp. 110, 111), so that if the
figures in the text are taken from it they must have been obtained by
somewhat laborious arithmetical operations. The particulars are as
follows:—</p>
<table summary="lf0206-01_table_005">
<colgroup>
<col class="col1" span="1" align="left"/>
<col class="col2" span="1" align="right"/>
<col class="col3" span="1" align="right"/>
<col class="col4" span="1" align="right"/>
<col class="col5" span="1" align="right"/>
<col class="col6" span="1" align="right"/>
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td colspan="2">Exported.</td>
<td colspan="3">Bounty payable.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>Qr.</td>
<td>Bush.</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Wheat</td>
<td>3,784,524</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>£946,131</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>7½</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Rye</td>
<td>765,056</td>
<td>6</td>
<td>133,884</td>
<td>18</td>
<td>7½</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Barley, malt and oats</td>
<td>3,479,575</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>434,946</td>
<td>18</td>
<td>1½</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>8,029,156</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>£1,514,962</td>
<td>17</td>
<td>4½]</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<li><p>[‘Years’
 is apparently a mistake for ‘months’. ‘There is such a superabundance
of corn that incredible quantities have been lately exported. I should
be afraid to mention what quantities have been exported if it did not
appear upon our custom-house books; but from them it appears that lately
 there was in three months’ time above £220,000 paid for bounties upon
corn exported.’—<i>Parliamentary History</i> (Hansard), vol. xiv., p. 589.]</p></li>
<li><p>See Tracts on the Corn Trade; Tract 3d. [This note appears first in ed. 2. The exports for 1750 are given in C. Smith, <i>op. cit.,</i>
 p. 111, as 947,602 qr. 1 bush. of wheat, 99,049 qr. 3 bush. of rye, and
 559,538 qr. 5 bush. of barley, malt and oats. The bounty on these
quantities would be £324,176 10s.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, pp. 78-80.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1, perhaps correctly, reads ‘quantity’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘fifth’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, pp. 169-171.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘fell to a third and then to a fifth, at which rate it still continues’.]</p></li>
<li><p>Solorzano, vol. ii. [Solorzano-Pereira, <i>De Indiarum Jure,</i> Madrid, 1777, lib. v., cap. i., §§ 22, 23; vol. ii., p. 883, col. 2. Ed. 1 does not contain the note.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘one and thirty years before 1535’. The date 1545 is given in Solorzano, <i>op. cit.,</i> vol. ii., p. 882, col. 2.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘In the course of a century’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘A hundred years’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed.
 1 reads ‘lower’ instead of ‘reduce,’ and does not contain ‘not only to
one-tenth, as in 1736, but to one-twentieth’. See above, p. 170, note.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Below, vol. ii., p. 70. Raynal, <i>Histoire philosophique,</i> Amsterdam ed. 1773, tom. iii., pp. 113, 116, takes the same view of the Peruvians.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Below, vol. ii., pp. 68-89 <i>passim.</i>]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Voyage to the South Sea,</i> p. 218, but the number mentioned is twenty-five to thirty thousand.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Voyage historique,</i>
 tom. i., p. 443, 445: ‘sixteen to eighteen thousand persons of Spanish
extraction, a comparatively small number of Indians and half-breeds, the
 greater part of the population being negroes and mulattoes.’]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>E.g.,</i> Santiago and Callao, Frezier, <i>Voyage,</i> pp. 102, 202; Juan and Ulloa, <i>Voyage historique,</i> vol. i., p. 468; vol. ii., p. 49.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Originally
 one ship, and, after 1720, two ships, were allowed to sail between
Acapulco in Mexico and the Philippines. For the regulations applied to
the trade see Uztariz, <i>Theory and Practice of Commerce and Maritime Affairs,</i> trans. by John Kippax, 1751, vol. i., pp. 206-208.]</p></li>
<li><p>[‘In
 order to prevent the great consumption of timber fit for the
construction of large ships of war, the East India Company were
prohibited from building, or allowing to be built for their service, any
 new ships, till the shipping in their employment should be reduced
under 45,000 tons, or employing any ships built after 18th March, 1772.
But they are at liberty to build any vessel whatever in India or the
colonies, or to charter any vessel built in India or the colonies, 12
Geo. III., c. 54.’—Macpherson, <i>Annals of Commerce,</i> 1805, <span class="sc"><span class="entity ad">ad</span></span> 1772, vol. iii., pp. 521, 522.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 places ‘in India’ here instead of in the line above.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, pp. 74, 75.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 does not contain ‘or at most as twelve’ here and two lines lower down.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Newton, in his <i>Representation to the Lords of the Treasury,</i> 1717 (reprinted in the <i>Universal Merchant,</i>
 quoted on the next page), says that in China and Japan the ratio is 9
or 10 to 1 and in India 12 to 1, and this carries away the silver from
all Europe. Magens, in a note to this passage (<i>Universal Merchant,</i>
 p. 90), says that down to 1732 such quantities of silver went to China
to fetch back gold that the price of gold in China rose and it became no
 longer profitable to send silver there.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘be the principal commodity’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘chiefly’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The same words are used below, p. 410.]</p></li>
<li><p>Postscript
 to the Universal Merchant, p. 15 and 16. This Postscript was not
printed till 1756, three years after the publication of the book, which
has never had a second edition. The postscript is, therefore, to be
found in few copies. It corrects several errors in the book. [This note
appears first in ed. 2. The title of the work referred to is <i>Farther Explanations of some particular subjects relating to Trade, Coin, and Exchanges, contained in the Universal Merchant,</i> by N. M., 1756. On p. 1 N. M. claims the authorship of the book ‘published by Mr. Horsley under the too pompous title of <i>The Universal Merchant</i>’. In the dedication of <i>The Universal Merchant,</i>
 1753, William Horsley, the editor, says the author ‘though an alien by
birth is an Englishman by interest’. Sir James Steuart, who calls him
‘Mr. Megens,’ says he lived long in England and wrote the <i>Universal Merchant</i> in German, from which it had been translated (<i>Inquiry into the Principles of Political Economy,</i> 1767, vol. ii., pp. 158, 292). The <i>Gentleman’s Magazine</i>
 for August, 1764, p. 398, contains in the obituary, under date August
18, 1764, ‘Nicholas Magens Esq. a merchant worth £100,000.’]</p></li>
<li><p>[The
 two periods are really five years, April, 1748, to April, 1753, and six
 years, January, 1747, to January, 1753, but the averages are correct,
being taken from Magens.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The 10s. here should be 14s., and two lines lower down the 14s. should be 10s.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Misprinted 13,984 1853/6 in ed. 2 and later editions.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Raynal, <i>Histoire philosophique et politique des établissemens et du commerce des Européens dans les deux Indes,</i> Amsterdam ed., 1773, tom. iii., p. 310.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Raynal, <i>Histoire philosophique,</i> Amsterdam ed., 1773, tom. iii., p. 385.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 does not contain ‘though manuscript’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, p. 207.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 does not contain ‘or one to twelve’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Cantillon gives one to ten for China and one to eight for Japan, <i>Essai,</i> p. 365.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, pp. 208, 209. The exact figure given by Magens, <i>Farther Explanations,</i> p. 16, is 1 to 221/10.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Ibid.,</i> p. 17.]</p></li>
<li><p>See Ruddiman’s Preface to Anderson’s Diplomata, &amp;c. Scotiæ. [<i>Selectus diplomatum et numismatum thesaurus</i>
 (quoted above, p. 184), pp. 84, 85; and in the translation, pp. 175,
176. But the statement that gold preponderated is founded merely on the
fact that the value of the gold coined in the periods 16th December,
1602, to 19th July, 1606, and 20th September, 1611, to 14th April, 1613,
 was greater than that of the silver coined in the same time, which
proves nothing about the proportions in the whole stock of coin. The
statement is repeated below, p. 280. The note appears first in ed. 2.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘European’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘European’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘one fifth part of it, or to twenty per cent.’]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, pp. 169, 201.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, p. 171.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘European’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed.
 1 places the ‘it would seem’ after ‘computed,’ omits ‘in the Spanish
market,’ and puts the whole sentence at the end of the paragraph.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 places the ‘indeed’ here.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘that’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, p. 209.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘It must still be true, however, that the whole mass of American gold comes to the European market at a price’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed.
 1 contains another paragraph, ‘Were the king of Spain to give up his
tax upon silver, the price of that metal might not, upon that account,
sink immediately in the European market. As long as the quantity brought
 thither continued the same as before, it would still continue to sell
at the same price. The first and immediate effect of this change, would
be to increase the profits of mining, the undertaker of the mine now
gaining all that he had been used to pay to the king. These great
profits would soon tempt a greater number of people to undertake the
working of new mines. Many mines would be wrought which cannot be
wrought at present, because they cannot afford to pay this tax, and the
quantity of silver brought to market would, in a few years be so much
augmented, probably, as to sink its price about one-fifth below its
present standard. This diminution in the value of silver would again
reduce the profits of mining nearly to their present rate.’]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, pp. 169, 201.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed.
 1 reads from the beginning of the paragraph, ‘It is not indeed very
probable, that any part of a tax which affords so important a revenue,
and which is imposed, too, upon one of the most proper subjects of
taxation, will ever be given up as long as it is possible to pay it. The
 impossibility of paying it, however, may in time make it necessary to
diminish it, in the same manner as it made it necessary to diminish the
tax upon gold.’]</p></li>
<li><p>[This paragraph appears first in ed. 2.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed.
 1 reads from the beginning of the paragraph, ‘That the first of these
three events has already begun to take place, or that silver has, during
 the course of the present century, begun to rise somewhat in its value
in the European market, the facts and arguments which have been alledged
 above dispose me to believe. The rise, indeed, has hitherto’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The last two paragraphs appear first in Additions and Corrections and ed. 3.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘may besides’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘perhaps’ here.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘That the increase of’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 places the ‘which arises’ here.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, p. 188 ff.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, pp. 175, 176.]</p></li>
<li><p>[As mentioned above, p. 151. Cicero, <i>In Verr.,</i> Act. II., lib. iii., c. 70, is the authority.]</p></li>
<li><p>Lib.
 x. c. 29. [‘Scio sestertiis sex candidam alioquin, quod est prope
inusitatum, venisse, quae Agrippinae Claudii principis conjugi dono
daretur.’ ‘Seius’ seems to be the result of misreading ‘Scio’.]</p></li>
<li><p>Lib. ix. c. 17. [This and the previous note appear first in ed. 2.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, pp. 150, 163.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, p. 152, and cp. below, p. 224.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Eds. 1-3 read ‘of all commercial’.]</p></li>
<li><p>Kalm’s Travels, vol. i. p. 343, 344. [<i>Travels
 into North America, containing its natural history and a circumstantial
 account of its Plantations and Agriculture in general, with the civil,
ecclesiastical and commercial state of the country, the manners of the
inhabitants and several curious and important remarks on various
subjects,</i> by Peter Kalm, Professor of Œconomy in the University
of Aobo, in Swedish Finland, and member of the S. Royal Academy of
Sciences. Translated by John Reinhold Forster, F.A.S., 3 vols., 1770.
The note appears first in ed. 2.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Varro, <i>De re rustica,</i> iii., 2, and Columella, <i>De re rustica,</i> viii., 10, <i>ad fin.,</i> where Varro is quoted.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Histoire Naturelle,</i> vol. v. (1755), p. 122.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>History,</i> ed. of 1773, vol. i., p. 226.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Juan and Ulloa, <i>Voyage historique,</i> 2de ptie, liv. i., chap. v., vol. i., p. 552.]</p></li>
<li><p>See
 Smith’s Memoirs of Wool, vol. i. c. 5, 6, and 7; also, vol. ii. c. 176.
 [Ed. 1 does not give the volumes and chapters. The work was <i>Chronicon Rusticum-Commerciale, or Memoirs of Wool, etc.,</i> by John Smith, and published 1747; see below, vol. ii., p. 150.]</p></li>
<li><p>[See below, vol. ii., p. 146, and Smith’s <i>Memoirs of Wool,</i> vol. i., pp. 159, 170, 182.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Eds. 1 and 2 read ‘importing it from all other countries’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Eds. 1 and 2 read ‘wool of all other countries’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Chronicon preciosum,</i> ed. of 1707, p. 100, quoting from Kennet’s <i>Par. Ant.</i> Burcester is the modern Bicester.]</p></li>
<li><p>[9 Geo. III., c. 39, for five years; continued by 14 Geo. III., c. 86, and 21 Geo. III., c. 29.]</p></li>
<li><p>[By
 5 Eliz., c. 22; 8 Eliz., c. 14; 18 Eliz., c. 9; 13 and 14 Car. II., c.
7, which last uses the words ‘common and public nuisance’. See
Blackstone, <i>Commentaries,</i> vol. iv., pp. 167-169.]</p></li>
<li><p>[9 Ann., c. 11.]</p></li>
<li><p>[This passage, from the beginning of the paragraph, is quoted at length below, vol. ii., p. 151.]</p></li>
<li><p>[John Smith, <i>Memoirs of Wool,</i>
 vol. i., p. 25, explains that the words ‘It shall be felony to carry
away any wool out of the realm until it be otherwise ordained’ do not
imply a perpetual prohibition.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The same words occur above, p. 189.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 does not contain ‘&amp;c.’]</p></li>
<li><p>[The arithmetic is slightly at fault. It should be, ‘happened to lose a fourth, a fifth, or a sixth part of its former value’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Below, pp. 256, 257.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, p. 78.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Recherches sur la Population,</i> pp. 293-304.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Essai sur les monnoies ou réflexions sur le rapport entre l’argent et les denrées,</i> 1746, esp. p. 181 of the ‘Variations dans les prix’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, p. 88.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Lectures,</i> pp. 159, 164.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 does not contain ‘but’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[C. 8.]</p></li>
<li><p>[C. 5. The quotations from this Act and from 4 Hen. VII., c. 8, are not quite <i>verbatim.</i>]</p></li>
<li><p>[‘Dr. Howell in his <i>History of the World,</i>
 vol. ii., p. 222, relates “that Queen Elizabeth, in this third year of
her reign, was presented with a pair of black knit silk stockings by her
 silk woman, Mrs. Mountague, and thenceforth she never wore cloth ones
any more.” This eminent author adds “that King Henry VIII., that
magnificent and expensive Prince, wore ordinarily cloth hose, except
there came from Spain, by great chance, a pair of silk stockings; for
Spain very early abounded in silk. His son, King Edward VI., was
presented with a pair of long Spanish silk stockings by his merchant,
Sir Thomas Gresham, and the present was then much taken notice of.” Thus
 it is plain that the invention of knit silk stockings originally came
from Spain. Others relate that one William Rider, an apprentice on
London Bridge, seeing at the house of an Italian merchant a pair of knit
 worsted stockings from Mantua, made with great skill a pair exactly
like them, which he presented in the year 1564 to William Earl of
Pembroke, and were the first of that kind worn in England.’—Adam
Anderson, <i>Historical and Chronological Deduction of the Origin of Commerce,</i> 1764, <span class="sc"><span class="entity ad">ad</span></span> 1561.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, pp. 118, 119.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Towards the end of chapter x. the same words occur, omitting ‘very’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, p. 54.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, pp. 71-73.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The list of prices, but not the division into periods, is apparently copied from Charles Smith (<i>Tracts on the Corn Trade,</i> 1766, pp. 97–102 cp. pp. 43, 104), who, however, states that it had been previously published, p. 96.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Lectures,</i> p. 181.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Eds. 1 and 2 place the ‘only’ here.]</p></li>
<li><p>[‘Ce
 n’est pas cette maison qui produit elle-même ces mille francs. . . . Le
 loyer d’une maison n’est point pour la société une augmentation de
revenu, une création de richesses nouvelles, il n’est au contraire qu’un
 mouvement, qu’un changement de main.’—Mercier de la Rivière, <i>L’Ordre naturel et essentiel des Sociétés politiques,</i> 12mo ed., 1767, vol. ii., p. 123, or in Daire’s <i>Physiocrates,</i> p. 487.]</p></li>
<li><p>[But in bk. i., ch. x., the remuneration of improved dexterity is treated as wages.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘users and consumers’ here and eleven lines lower.]</p></li>
<li><p>[There seems no reason whatever for supposing that this is necessarily the ‘natural’ action.]</p></li>
<li><p>[In
 this paragraph the capital or stock of goods is confused with the goods
 themselves. The goods of which the stock consists may become revenue,
but the stock itself cannot. The maintenance of a stock, even of
perishable and consumable goods, does form a charge on the labour of the
 society.]</p></li>
<li><p>[If
 it were not for the use of the old-fashioned term ‘circulation’ instead
 of the newer ‘produce,’ the explanation which follows would be
unnecessary. No one could be suspected of a desire to add all the money
to the annual produce.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 does not contain ‘or’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, pp. 270, 271.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Petty’s estimate in <i>Verbum Sapienti</i>
 is £40,000,000 for the income and £6,000,000 for the coin. Gregory
King’s estimate is £43,500,000 for the income and no less than
£11,500,000 for the coin, in Geo. Chalmers, <i>Estimate,</i> 1802, pp. 423, 427.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Below, p. 291.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Misprinted ‘contrary’ in ed. 5.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Adam Anderson, <i>Commerce,</i> <span class="sc"><span class="entity ad">ad</span></span> 1695.]</p></li>
<li><p>See Ruddiman’s Preface to Anderson’s Diplomata, &amp;c. Scotiæ. [Pp. 84, 85. See above, p. 212, note.]</p></li>
<li><p>[‘The
 folly of a few misers or the fear that people might have of losing
their money, or various other dangers and accidents, prevented very many
 of the old Scots coins from being brought in,’ <i>op. cit.,</i> p. 175. Ruddiman in a note, <i>op. cit.,</i>
 p. 231, says: ‘The English coin was also ordained to be called in,’ but
 does not include it in his estimate of not less than £900,000, p. 176.]</p></li>
<li><p>[From
 1766 to 1772 inclusive the coinage averaged about £810,000 per annum.
The amount for ‘ten years together’ is stated below, vol. ii., pp. 51,
56, to have been upwards of £800,000 a year, though the average for the
ten years 1763-1772 was only £760,000. But the inclusion of the large
coinage of 1773, <i>viz.,</i> £1,317,645, would raise these averages considerably. See the figures at the end of each year in Macpherson, <i>Annals of Commerce.</i>]</p></li>
<li><p>[Misprinted ‘remain’ in ed. 5.]</p></li>
<li><p>[But as Playfair (ed. of <i>Wealth of Nations,</i> vol. i., p. 472) points out, the more customers a bank has the more it is likely to know the transactions of each of them.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, p. 280.]</p></li>
<li><p>The
 method described in the text was by no means either the most common or
the most expensive one in which those adventurers sometimes raised money
 by circulation. It frequently happened that A in Edinburgh would enable
 B in London to pay the first bill of exchange by drawing, a few days
before it became due, a second bill at three months date upon the same B
 in London. This bill, being payable to his own order, A sold in
Edinburgh at par; and with its contents purchased bills upon London
payable at sight to the order of B, to whom he sent them by the post.
Towards the end of the late war, the exchange between Edinburgh and
London was frequently three per cent. against Edinburgh, and those bills
 at sight must frequently have cost A that premium. This transaction
therefore being repeated at least four times in the year, and being
loaded with a commission of at least one half per cent. upon each
repetition, must at that period have cost A at least fourteen per cent.
in the year. At other times A would enable B to discharge the first bill
 of exchange by drawing, a few days before it became due, a second bill
at two months date; not upon B, but upon some third person, C, for
example, in London. This other bill was made payable to the order of B,
who, upon its being accepted by C, discounted it with some banker in
London; and A enabled C to discharge it by drawing, a few days before it
 became due, a third bill, likewise at two months date, sometimes upon
his first correspondent B, and sometimes upon some fourth or fifth
person, D or E, for example. This third bill was made payable to the
order of C; who, as soon as it was accepted, discounted it in the same
manner with some banker in London. Such operations being repeated at
least six times in the year, and being loaded with a commission of at
least one-half per cent. upon each repetition, together with the legal
interest of five per cent., this method of raising money, in the same
manner as that described in the text, must have cost A something more
than eight per cent. By saving, however, the exchange between Edinburgh
and London it was less expensive than that mentioned in the foregoing
part of this note; but then it required an established credit with more
houses than one in London, an advantage which many of these adventurers
could not always find it easy to procure. [This note appears first in
ed. 2. Playfair observes that the calculation of the loss of 14 per
cent. by the first method is wrong, since ‘if A at Edinburgh negotiated
his bills on London at 3 per cent. loss, he would gain as much in
purchasing bills on London with the money.’—Ed. of <i>Wealth of Nations,</i> vol. i., p. 483, note.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The index <i>s.v.</i>
 Bank gives the name, ‘the Ayr bank’. Its head office was at Ayr, but it
 had branches at Edinburgh and Dumfries. A detailed history of it is to
be found in <i>The Precipitation and Fall of Messrs.
Douglas, Heron and Company, late Bankers in Air with the Causes of their
 Distress and Ruin investigated and considered by a Committee of Inquiry
 appointed by the Proprietors,</i> Edinburgh, 1778. From this it
appears that Smith’s account of the proceedings of the bank is extremely
 accurate, a fact which is doubtless due to his old pupil, the Duke of
Buccleuch, having been one of the principal shareholders. Writing to
Pulteney on 5th September, 1772, Smith says, ‘though I have had no
concern myself in the public calamities, some of the friends in whom I
interest myself the most have been deeply concerned in them; and my
attention has been a good deal occupied about the most proper method of
extricating them’. The extrication was effected chiefly by the sale of
redeemable annuities. See Rae, <i>Life of Adam Smith,</i> 1895, pp. 253-255; David Macpherson, <i>Annals of Commerce,</i> vol. iii., pp. 525, 553; <i>House of Commons’ Journals,</i>
 vol. xxxiv., pp. 493-495, and the Act of Parliament, 14 Geo. III., c.
21. The East India Company opposed the bill on the ground that the bonds
 to be issued would compete with theirs, but their opposition was
defeated by a vote of 176 to 36 in the House of Commons, <i>Journals,</i> vol. xxxiv., p. 601.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 does not contain ‘those’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Macpherson, <i>op. cit.,</i>
 p. 525, says the partners were the Dukes of Buccleuch and Queensberry,
the Earl of Dumfries, Mr. Douglas and many other gentlemen.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Lectures,</i> p. 211. The bookseller’s preface to the 2nd ed. of <i>Money and Trade</i>
 (below, p. 301, note 3) says the work consists of ‘some heads of a
scheme which Mr. Law proposed to the Parliament of Scotland in the year
1705’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[These two books are in Bonar, <i>Catalogue of Adam Smith’s Library,</i> pp. 35, 36. Du Tot’s is <i>Réflexions
 politiques sur les Finances et le Commerce, où l’on examine quelles ont
 été sur les revenus, les denrées, le change étranger et conséquemment
sur notre commerce, les influences des augmentations et des diminutions
des valeurs numéraires des monnoyes,</i> La Haye, 1754. Du Verney’s is <i>Examen du livre intitulé</i> ‘<i>Réflexions politiques sur les Finances et le Commerce,</i>’ La Haye, 1740.]</p></li>
<li><p>[In <i>Lectures</i> there is an account, apparently derived from Du Verney, which extends over eight pages, 211-218.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Money and Trade Considered, with a Proposal for Supplying the Nation with Money,</i> 1705.]</p></li>
<li><p>James Postlethwaite’s History of the Public Revenue, page 301. [<i>History of the Public Revenue from</i> 1688 <i>to</i> 1753, <i>with an Appendix to</i> 1758, by James Postlethwayt, F.R.S., 1759.]</p></li>
<li><p>[These three lines are not in ed. 1.]</p></li>
<li><p>[From
 ‘it was incorporated,’ on p. 301, to this point is an abstract of the
‘Historical State of the Bank of England,’ in Postlethwayt’s <i>History of the Public Revenue,</i> pp. 301-310. The totals are taken from the bottom of Postlethwayt’s pages.]</p></li>
<li><p>[In 1745, Magens, <i>Universal Merchant,</i> p. 31, suggests that there may have been suspicions that the money was being drawn out for the support of the rebellion.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Eds. 1 and 2 read ‘him’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The Bank of England issued none under £20 till 1759, when £15 and £10 notes were introduced.—Anderson, <i>Commerce,</i> <span class="sc"><span class="entity ad">ad</span></span> 1759.]</p></li>
<li><p>[5 Geo. III., c. 49.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The
 reference is probably to the passages in the ‘Discourse of Money,’ and
the ‘Discourse of the Balance of Trade,’ where Hume censures paper money
 as the cause of a rise of prices.—<i>Political Discourses,</i> 1752, pp. 43-45, 89-91; cp. <i>Lectures,</i> p. 197.]</p></li>
<li><p>[5 Geo. III., c. 49; referred to above, p. 305.]</p></li>
<li><p>[15 Geo. III., c. 51.]</p></li>
<li><p>[‘A
 knavish device of fraudulent debtors of the loan money to pay off their
 loans at a very depreciated value.’ William Douglass, M.D., <i>Summary,
 Historical and Political, of the First Planting, Progressive
Improvements, and Present State of the British Settlements in North
America,</i> 1760, vol. ii., p. 107. The author uses strong language
in many places about what he calls ‘this accursed affair of plantation
paper currencies,’ vol. ii., p. 13, note (<i>s</i>); cp. vol. i., pp. 310, 359; vol. ii., pp. 254-255, 334-335.]</p></li>
<li><p>[4 Geo. III., c. 34.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Below, pp. 443-452. See also the ‘Advertisement’ or preface to the 4th ed., above.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘This account of the Bank of Amsterdam, however, I have reason to believe, is altogether chimerical.’]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘sink the value of gold and silver, or occasion equal quantities of those metals’.]</p></li>
<li><p>Some
 French authors of great learning and ingenuity have used those words in
 a different sense. In the last chapter of the fourth book I shall
endeavour to show that their sense is an improper one.</p></li>
<li><p>[In
 the argument which follows in the text the fact is overlooked that this
 is only true when the manufacturers are employed to produce commodities
 for sale and when the menial servants are employed merely for the
comfort of the employer. A man may and often does grow poor by employing
 people to make ‘particular subjects or vendible commodities’ for his
own consumption, and an innkeeper may and often does grow rich by
employing menial servants.]</p></li>
<li><p>[But
 in the ‘Introduction and Plan of the Work,’ vol. i., p. 2, ‘useful’ is
coupled with ‘productive,’ and used as equivalent to it.]</p></li>
<li><p>[It
 must be observed that in this paragraph produce is not used in the
ordinary economic sense of income or net produce, but as including all
products, <i>e.g.,</i> the oil used in weaving machinery as well as the cloth.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The
 question first propounded, whether profits form a larger proportion of
the produce, is wholly lost sight of. With a stock larger in proportion
to the produce, a lower rate of profit may give a larger proportion of
the produce.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Viz.,</i> Paris, Toulouse, Grenoble, Bordeaux, Dijon, Rouen, Aix, Rennes, Pau, Metz, Besançon and Douai.—<i>Encyclopédie,</i> tom. xii., 1765, <i>s.v.</i> Parlement.]</p></li>
<li><p>[In <i>Lectures,</i>
 pp. 154-156, the idleness of Edinburgh and such like places compared
with Glasgow is attributed simply to the want of independence in the
inhabitants. The introduction of revenue and capital is the fruit of
study of the physiocratic doctrines.]</p></li>
<li><p>[This
 paradox is arrived at through a confusion between the remuneration of
the labourers who produce the additions to the capital and the additions
 themselves. What is really saved is the additions to the capital, and
these are not consumed.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 does not contain ‘it’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Misprinted ‘instance’ in ed. 5, and consequently in some modern editions.]</p></li>
<li><p>[‘Impoverished’ is here equivalent to ‘made poor,’ <i>i.e.,</i> ruined, not merely to ‘made poorer’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘is’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘1701’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘the next year’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[As suggested by Germain Garnier’s note on this passage (<i>Recherches sur la Nature et les Causes de la Richesse des Nations,</i>
 1802, tom. ii., p. 346), this was doubtless the Count of Bruhl,
Minister and Great Chamberlain to the King of Poland, who left at his
death 365 suits of clothes, all very rich. Jonas Hanway (<i>Historical
 Account of the British Trade over the Caspian Sea, with a Journal of
Travels from London through Russia into Persia, and back through Russia,
 Germany and Holland,</i> 1753, vol. ii., p. 230) says this count had
 300 or 400 suits of rich clothes, and had ‘collected all the finest
colours of all the finest cloths, velvets, and silks of all the
manufactures, not to mention the different kinds of lace and
embroideries of Europe,’ and also pictures and books, at Dresden. He
died in 1764.]</p></li>
<li><p>[This
 was the Castle Inn at Marlborough, which ceased to be an inn and became
 Marlborough College in 1843, thus undergoing another vicissitude.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The
 innkeeper, Mrs. Walker, a zealous Jacobite, refused an offer of fifty
guineas for the bed, but presented it about 1764 to the Earl of Elgin
(John Fernie, <i>History of the Town and Parish of Dunfermline,</i> 1815, p. 71), and its remains now form a mantel-piece in the dining-room at Broomhall, near Dunfermline.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 does not contain ‘though’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 does not contain ‘&amp;c.’]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Lectures,</i> p. 220.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Locke, <i>Some Considerations,</i> ed. of 1696, pp. 6, 10, 11, 81; Law, <i>Money and Trade,</i> 2nd ed., 1720, p. 17; Montesquieu, <i>Esprit des Lois,</i>
 liv. xxii., ch. vi. Locke and Law suppose that the rate rises and falls
 with the quantity of money, and Montesquieu specifically attributes the
 historical fall to the discovery of the American mines. Cantillon
disapproves of the common and received idea that an increase of
effective money diminishes the rate of interest.—<i>Essai,</i> pp. 282-285; see <i>Lectures,</i> pp. 219, 220.]</p></li>
<li><p>[In his essay, ‘Of Interest,’ in <i>Political Discourses,</i> 1752.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, p. 92.]</p></li>
<li><p>[This seems obvious, but it was distinctly denied by Locke, <i>Some Considerations,</i> pp. 83, 84.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 does not contain ‘its’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 does not contain ‘immediately’ here or seven lines lower down.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 does not contain ‘immediately’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Below, p. 390.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Possibly the supposed authority for this statement is Montesquieu, <i>Esprit des Lois,</i>
 liv., xxi., ch. vi.: ‘L’Egypte éloignée par la religion et par les
mœurs de toute communication avec les étrangers, ne faisait guère de
commerce au-dehors. . . . Les Egyptiens furent si peu jaloux du commerce
 du dehors qu’ils laissèrent celui de la mer rouge à toutes les petites
nations qui y eurent quelque port.’]</p></li>
<li><p>[If
 this doctrine as to the advantage of quick returns had been applied
earlier in the chapter, it would have made havoc of the argument as to
the superiority of agriculture.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The second part of this sentence is not in Ed. 1.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Bk. iv.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘belong’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[But
 why may not the labour be diverted to the production of ‘something for
which there is a demand at home’? The ‘corn, woollens and hardware’
immediately below perhaps suggest that it is supposed the country has
certain physical characteristics which compel its inhabitants to produce
 particular commodities.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Below, vol. ii., p. 2. The figures 96,000 and 13,500 are given in the continuation of Anderson’s <i>Commerce,</i> <span class="sc"><span class="entity ad">ad</span></span> 1775, ed. of 1801, vol. iv., p. 187.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The
 error that agriculture produces substances and manufacture only alters
them is doubtless at the bottom of much of the support gained by the
theory of productive and unproductive labour.]</p></li>
<li><p>[This passage, from the beginning of the paragraph, may well have been suggested by Cantillon, <i>Essai,</i> pp. 11-22.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘their’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘considerable advantage that it should’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Primogeniture and entails are censured as inimical to agriculture in <i>Lectures,</i> pp. 120, 124, 228.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Lectures,</i> pp. 117-118.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘form’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[In <i>Lectures,</i> p. 123, the Roman origin of entails appears to be accepted.]</p></li>
<li><p>[This passage follows <i>Lectures,</i> p. 124, rather closely, reproducing even the repetition of ‘absurd’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 does not contain ‘supposed to be’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[This remark follows <i>Lectures,</i> p. 228. Cp. below, pp. 382, 383, 390.]</p></li>
<li><p>[‘A
 small part of the West of Europe is the only portion of the globe that
is free from slavery,’ ‘and is nothing in comparison with the vast
continents where it still prevails.’—<i>Lectures,</i> p. 96.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Pliny, <i>H. N.,</i> lib. xviii., cap. iv.; Columella, <i>De re rustica,</i> lib. i., præfatio.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Politics,</i> 1265<i>a.</i>]</p></li>
<li><p>[Raynal, <i>Histoire philosophique</i> (Amsterdam ed.), tom. vi., pp. 368-388.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, p. 158; <i>Lectures,</i> p. 225.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Ibid.,</i> pp. 100, 101.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Raynal, <i>Histoire philosophique</i> (Amsterdam ed.), tom. i., p. 12. In <i>Lectures,</i> pp. 101, 102, Innocent III. appears in error for Alexander III.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Probably Quesnay’s estimate; cp. his article on ‘Fermiers’ in the <i>Encyclopédie,</i> reprinted in his <i>Œuvres,</i> ed. Oncken, 1888, pp. 160, 171.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Garnier
 is certainly wrong in suggesting in his note, ‘ce nom vient
probablement de la manière dont ils étaient autrefois armés en guerre.’—<i>Recherches,</i>
 etc., tom. ii., p. 428. ‘Bow’ is the farming stock; ‘steel’ is said to
indicate the nature of the contract, and eisern vieh and bestia ferri
are quoted as parallels by Cosmo Innes, <i>Lectures on Scotch Legal Antiquities,</i> 1872, pp. 245, 266.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Gilbert, <i>Treatise of Tenures,</i> 3rd ed., 1757, pp. 34 and 54; Blackstone, <i>Commentaries,</i> vol. ii., pp. 141, 142. The whole paragraph follows <i>Lectures,</i> p. 226, rather closely.]</p></li>
<li><p>[M. Bacon, <i>New Abridgment of the Law,</i> 3rd ed., 1768, vol. ii., p. 160, <i>s.v.</i> Ejectment; cp. <i>Lectures,</i> p. 227.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Blackstone, <i>Commentaries,</i> iii., 197.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Lectures,</i> pp. 227-228.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Acts of 1449, c. 6, ‘ordained for the safety and favour of the poor people that labours the ground.’]</p></li>
<li><p>[10 Geo. III., c. 51.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Below, vol. ii., p. 176.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Lectures,</i> pp. 226, 227.]</p></li>
<li><p>[20 Geo. II., c. 50, § 21.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Lectures,</i> p. 227.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘that’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Originally
 tenths and fifteenths of movable goods; subsequently fixed sums levied
from the parishes, and raised by them like other local rates; see
Cannan, <i>History of Local Rates,</i> 1896, pp. 13-14, 18-20, 22 note, 23 note.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Lectures,</i> p. 226.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Essays on Husbandry</i> (by Walter Harte), 1764, pp. 69-80.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Below, vol. ii., pp. 25-35.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, p. 151; <i>Lectures,</i> p. 229.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Lectures,</i> p. 233.]</p></li>
<li><p>See Brady’s historical treatise of Cities and Burroughs, p. 3, &amp;c. [Robert Brady, <i>Historical Treatise of Cities and Burghs or Boroughs,</i>
 2nd ed., 1711. See, for the statements as to the position of townsmen
and traders contained in these two paragraphs, esp. pp. 16, 18, and
Appendix, p. 8. Cp. Hume, <i>History,</i> ed. of 1773, vol. i., p. 205, where Domesday and Brady are both mentioned. The note appears first in ed. 2.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 does not contain ‘the’.]</p></li>
<li><p>See
 Madox Firma Burgi, [1726,] p. 18. also [Madox,] History [and
Antiquities] of the Exchequer, chap. 10. sect. v. p. 223, first edition
[1711. But the statement in the text above that the farm was in place of
 poll taxes is not supported by <i>Firma Burgi,</i>
p. 251, where Madox says the ‘yearly ferme of towns arose out of certain
 locata or demised things that yielded issues or profit,’ <i>e.g.,</i>
 assised rents, pleas, perquisites, custom of goods, fairs, markets,
stallage, aldermanries, tolls and wharfage. It was only if these fell
short of the farm, that a direct contribution from the townsmen would be
 levied. The note appears first in ed. 2.]</p></li>
<li><p>[An instance is given in <i>Firma Burgi,</i> p. 21.]</p></li>
<li><p>See
 Madox Firma Burgi: See also Pfeffel in the remarkable events under
Frederic II. and his successors of the house of Suabia. [This note
appears first in ed. 2. In Pfeffel’s <i>Nouvel Abrégé chronologique de Thistoire et du droit public d’Allemagne,</i>
 1776, ‘Evénements remarquables sous Frédéric II.’ is a chapter heading,
 and subsequent chapters are headed in the same way. For the references
to the power of the towns, see the index, <i>s.v.</i> Villes at the end of tom. i.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Lectures,</i> p. 40.]</p></li>
<li><p>See Madox [<i>Firma Burgi,</i> pp. 35, 150. The note is not in ed. 1].</p></li>
<li><p>[‘L’excommunication
 de Philippe I. et son inapplication aux affaires avaient presque ruiné
toute son autorité en France. . . . Les plus puissants vassaux de France
 étaient devenus plus que jamais indociles à l’égard du souverain. . . .
 Louis le Gros, à qui Philippe son père avait abandonné la conduite de
l’état sur les dernières années de sa vie, délibera avec les évêques du
domaine royal, des moyens de remédier à ces maux, et imagina avec eux
une nouvelle police pour la levée des troupes, et une nouvelle forme de
justice dans les villes pour empêcher l’impunité des crimes.’—G. Daniel,
 <i>Histoire de France,</i> 1755, vol. iii., pp. 512-513. A description of the new institutions follows, pp. 513-514.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Possibly Du Cange (who is referred to in the margin of Daniel, p. 514, and by Hume, <i>History,</i> ed. 1773, vol. ii., p. 118), <i>Glossarium, s.v.</i> Commune, communia, etc., ‘Primus vero ejus modi <i>Communias</i> in Francia Ludov. VII. [? VI.] rex multiplicavit et auxit.’]</p></li>
<li><p>See Pfeffel. [Reference above, p. 374 note. The note is not in ed. 1.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 places ‘in those assemblies’ here instead of in the line above; see <i>Lectures,</i> p. 41.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Lectures,</i> p. 40.]</p></li>
<li><p>[‘The most signal and most durable monument of human folly that has yet appeared in any age or nation,’ Hume, <i>History,</i> ed. of 1773, vol. i., p. 292; ‘this universal frenzy,’ <i>ibid.,</i> p. 298, of ed. 1770, vol. i., p. 327, but in his 1st ed. Hume wrote ‘universal madness’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Misprinted ‘in’ in ed. 5.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘that were introduced into Venice in the beginning of’.]</p></li>
<li><p>See Sandi Istoria Civile de Vinezia, Part 2. vol. i. page 247, and 256. [Vettor Sandi, <i>Principj di storia civile della Repubblica di Venezia,</i>
 Venice, 1755. The pages should be 257, 258. This note and the three
sentences in the text which the reference covers, from ‘They were
banished’ to ‘three hundred workmen,’ appear first in ed. 2.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘being in’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘seems’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed.
 1 (beginning six lines higher up), ‘When the Venetian manufacture
flourished, there was not a mulberry tree, nor consequently a silkworm,
in all Lombardy. They brought the materials from Sicily and from the
Levant, the manufacture itself being in imitation of those carried on in
 the Greek empire. Mulberry trees were first planted in Lombardy in the
beginning of the sixteenth century, by the encouragement of Ludovico
Sforza, Duke of Milan.’]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, p. 363.]</p></li>
<li><p>[‘Of Commerce’ and ‘Of Luxury’ in <i>Political Discourses,</i> 1752, and <i>History,</i> ed. of 1773, vol. iii., p. 400.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Evidently from Hume, <i>History,</i> ed. of 1773, vol. i., p. 384.]</p></li>
<li><p>[‘No
 less than 30,000 persons are said to have daily lived at his board in
the different manors and castles which he possessed in England.’—Hume, <i>History,</i> ed. of 1773, vol. iii., p. 182. In <i>Lectures,</i> p. 42, it had been ‘40,000 people, besides tenants’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[‘An
 Arab prince will often dine in the street, before his door, and call to
 all that pass, even beggars, in the usual expression, Bismillah, that
is, In the name of God; who come and sit down, and when they have done,
give their Hamdellilah, that is, God be praised. For the Arabs are great
 levellers, put everybody on a footing with them; and it is by such
generosity and hospitality that they maintain their interest.’—Richard
Pococke, <i>Description of the East,</i> 1743, vol. i., p. 183.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Eds. 1 and 2 read ‘appears’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Hume, <i>History,</i> ed. of 1773, i., 224.]</p></li>
<li><p>[‘The
 Highlands of Scotland have long been entitled by law to every privilege
 of British subjects; but it was not till very lately that the common
people could in fact enjoy those privileges.’—Hume, <i>History,</i> vol. i., p. 214, ed. of 1773. Cp. <i>Lectures,</i> p. 116.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Lectures,</i> pp. 38, 39.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Hume, <i>History,</i> ed. of 1773, vol. iii., p. 400; vol. v., p. 488.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Histoire
 généalogique des Tatars traduite du manuscript Tartare
D’Abulgasi-Bayadur-chan et enrichie d’un grand nombre de remarques
authentiques et très curieuses sur le véritable estat present de l’Asie
septentrionale avec les cartes géographiques nécessaires,</i> par D.,
 Leyden, 1726. The preface says some Swedish officers imprisoned in
Siberia had it translated into Russian and then retranslated it
themselves into various other languages.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, p. 72, note.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 5 omits ‘who’ by a misprint.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Eds. 2-5 read ‘with all,’ doubtless a corruption.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Cp. above, p. 363.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 does not contain ‘thither’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 does not contain ‘the’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[18 Car. II., c. 2.]</p></li>
<li><p>[32 Geo. II., c. 11, § 1; 5 Geo. III., c. 10; 12 Geo. III., c. 2.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Below, pp. 424-427, and vol. ii., pp. 25-45.]</p></li>
<li><p>[It
 seems likely that Charles VIII. is here (though not on the next page)
confused with Charles of Anjou, brother of St. Louis. At any rate
Hénault (who is quoted below, p. 122) says: ‘Notre marine aussitôt
détruite que créée sous Philippe Auguste, s’était bien rétablie sous S.
Louis si, comme le dit un historien, ce prince embarqua soixante-mille
hommes à Aigues-mortes . . . quant à la première expédition, Joinville
dit qu’au départ de Chypre pour la conquête de Damiette, il y avait
dix-huit cents vaisseaux tant grands que petits. S. Louis avait aussi
mis en mer une flotte considérable pour défendre les côtes de Poitou
contre la flotte de Henri III., et son frère Charles d’Anjou en avait
une de quatrevingts voiles, composée de galères et de vaisseaux, lors de
 son expédition de Naples.’—<i>Nouvel Abrégé chronologique de l’histoire de France,</i> 1768, tom. i., p. 201, <span class="sc"><span class="entity ad">ad</span></span> 1299. This puts the French marine 200 years earlier.]</p></li>
<li><p>[‘Perchè
 ridotta tutta in somma pace e tranquillità, coltivata non meno ne’
luoghi più montuosi, e più sterili, che nelle pianure, e regioni sue più
 fertili, nè sottoposta ad altro Imperio, che de’ suoi medesimi, non
solo era abbondantissima d’ abitatori, e di richezze’.—Guicciardini, <i>Della Istoria d’ Italia,</i> Venice, 1738, vol. i., p. 2.]</p></li>
<li><p>[For other definitions of the purpose or nature of political economy see the index, <i>s.v.</i>]</p></li>
<li><p>[There
 seems to be a confusion between Plano-Carpini, a Franciscan sent as
legate by Pope Innocent IV. in 1246, and Guillaume de Rubruquis, another
 Franciscan sent as ambassador by Louis IX. in 1253. As is pointed out
by Rogers in a note on this passage, the reference appears to be to
Rubruquis, <i>Voyage en Tartarie et à la Chine,</i>
chap. xxxiii. The great Khan’s secretaries, Rubruquis states, on one
occasion displayed curiosity about France: ‘s’enquérant s’il y avait
force bœufs, moutons, et chevaux, comme s’ils eussent déjà été tous
prêts d’y venir et emmener tout’. Plano-Carpini and Rubruquis are both
in Bergeron’s <i>Voyages faits principalement en Asie dans les xii., xiii., xiv. et xv. siècles,</i> La Haye, 1735.]</p></li>
<li><p>[There
 is very little foundation for any part of this paragraph. It perhaps
originated in an inaccurate recollection of pp. 17, 18 and 77-79 of <i>Some Considerations</i> (1696 ed.), and §§ 46-50 of <i>Civil Government.</i> It was probably transferred bodily from the <i>Lectures</i> without verification. See <i>Lectures,</i> p. 198.]</p></li>
<li><p>[See below, vol. ii., p. 13, note.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘expect least of all’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The words ‘forth of the realm’ occur in (January) 1487, c. 11. Other acts are 1436, c. 13; 1451, c. 15; 1482, c. 8.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘increase it’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>England’s Treasure by Forraign Trade, or the Ballance of our Forraign Trade is the Rule of our Treasure,</i> 1664, chap. iv., <i>ad fin.,</i> which reads, however, ‘we will rather accompt him a mad man’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Mun, <i>England’s Treasure,</i> chap. vi.]</p></li>
<li><p>[‘Among
 other things relating to trade there hath been much discourse of the
balance of trade; the right understanding whereof may be of singular
use.’—Josiah Child, <i>New Discourse of Trade,</i> 1694, p. 152, chap. ix., introducing an explanation. The term was used before Mun’s work was written. See Palgrave’s <i>Dictionary of Political Economy, s.v.</i> Balance of Trade, History of the theory.]</p></li>
<li><p>[This sentence appears first in ed. 2. Ed. 1 begins the next sentence, ‘The high price of exchange therefore would tend’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[‘In’ is a mistake for ‘by’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Here and four lines higher eds. 1-3 read ‘if there was’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘in’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Eds. 1-3 read ‘if it was’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The
 absence of any reference to the long Digression in bk. i., chap. xi.,
suggests that this passage was written before the Digression was
incorporated in the work. Contrast the reference below, vol. ii., p. 9.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘not only without any inconveniency but with very great advantages’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[This
 probably refers to p. 279, though the object there is rather to insist
on the largeness of the saving effected by dispensing with money, and
pp. 269-275.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Eds. 1-3 read ‘was it not’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Present State of the Nation</i> (see next page and note), p. 28.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Eds. 1-3 read ‘was’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘according to the exaggerated computation of Mr. Horsely’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Lectures,</i> p. 199.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>The
 Present State of the Nation, particularly with respect to its Trade,
Finances, etc., etc., addressed to the King and both Houses of
Parliament,</i> 1768 (written under the direction of George Grenville by William Knox), pp. 7, 8.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, pp. 207-209.]</p></li>
<li><p>[In
 place of these two sentences ed. 1 reads ‘A considerable part of the
annual surplus of its manufactures must indeed in this case be exported
without bringing back any returns. Some part of it, however, may still
continue to bring back a return.’]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>History,</i> chaps. xix. and xx., vol. iii., pp. 103, 104, 165 in ed. of 1773.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Below, p. 396.]</p></li>
<li><p>[This sentence and the nine words before it are repeated below, vol. ii., p. 393.]</p></li>
<li><p>[‘Dercyllidas’ appears to be a mistake for Antiochus. See Xenophon, <i>Hellenica,</i> vii., i., § 38.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘thereby increase’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[See above, p. 392.]</p></li>
<li><p>[See below, vol ii., pp. 37, 38.]</p></li>
<li><p>[11 and 12 Ed. III., c. 3; 4 Ed. IV., c. 7.]</p></li>
<li><p>[6 Geo. III., c. 28.]</p></li>
<li><p>[By the additional duties, 7 Geo. III., c. 28.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Misprinted ‘manufactures’ in ed. 5.]</p></li>
<li><p>[This sentence appears first in Additions and Corrections and ed. 3.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘certain’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, pp. 348-352.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘the’ here.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘augmenting,’ which seems more correct.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, p. 418, and below, vol. ii., pp. 37, 38.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Eds. 1-3 read ‘was’ here and six lines lower down.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Charles Smith, <i>Three Tracts on the Corn-Trade and Corn-Laws,</i> pp. 144-145. The same figure is quoted below, vol. ii., p. 36.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 does not contain the words ‘in the actual state of tillage’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Eds. 1-3 read ‘was’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Joseph Van Robais in 1669.—John Smith, <i>Memoirs of Wool,</i> vol. ii., pp. 426, 427, but neither John Smith nor Charles King, <i>British Merchant,</i> 1721, vol. ii., pp. 93, 94, gives the particular stipulation mentioned.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Cato, <i>De re rustica, ad init.,</i> but ‘<i>Questus</i>’ should of course be ‘<i>quæstus</i>’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[12 Car. II., c. 18, ‘An act for the encouraging and increasing of shipping and navigation.’]</p></li>
<li><p>[§§ 1 and 6.]</p></li>
<li><p>[§§
 8 and 9. Eds. 1 and 2 read ‘ship and cargo’. The alteration was
probably made in order to avoid wearisome repetition of the same phrase
in the three paragraphs.]</p></li>
<li><p>[§
 4, which, however, applies to all such goods of foreign growth and
manufacture as were forbidden to be imported except in English ships,
not only to bulky goods. The words ‘great variety of the most bulky
articles of importation’ occur at the beginning of the previous
paragraph, and are perhaps copied here by mistake.]</p></li>
<li><p>[§ 5.]</p></li>
<li><p>[In
 1651, by ‘An act for the increase of shipping and encouragement of the
navigation of this nation,’ p. 1,449 in the collection of Commonwealth
Acts.]</p></li>
<li><p>[By 25 Car. II., c. 6, § 1, except on coal. The plural ‘acts’ may refer to renewing acts. Anderson, <i>Commerce,</i> <span class="sc"><span class="entity ad">ad</span></span> 1672.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 contains the words ‘malt, beer’ here.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Below, vol. ii., pp. 354-359.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘it is’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The
 importation of bone lace was prohibited by 13 and 14 Car. II., c. 13,
and 9, and 10 W. III., c. 9, was passed to make the prohibition more
effectual. By 11 and 12 W. III., c. 11, it was provided that the
prohibition should cease three months after English woollen manufactures
 were readmitted to Flanders.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘injury ourselves, both to those classes and to.’]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, p. 136.]</p></li>
<li><p>[12 Car. II., c. 16; 12 Ann., st. 1, § 13; 3 Geo. III., c. 8, gave this liberty after particular wars.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘Utopea’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Below, vol. ii., pp. 378-383.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 contains no part headings and does not divide the chapter into parts.]</p></li>
<li><p>[18 Geo. II., c. 36; 7 Geo. III., c. 43.]</p></li>
<li><p>[4 W. and M., c. 5, § 2.]</p></li>
<li><p>[7
 and 8 W. III., c. 20; but wine and vinegar were excepted from the
general increase of 25 per cent. as well as brandy, upon which the
additional duty was £30 per ton of single proof and £60 per ton of
double proof.]</p></li>
<li><p>[See below, vol. ii., pp. 363, 364.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Nearly
 all the matter from the beginning of the chapter to this point appears
first in Additions and Corrections and ed. 3. Eds. 1 and 2 contain only
the first sentence of the chapter and then proceed, ‘Thus in Great
Britain higher duties are laid upon the wines of France than upon those
of Portugal. German linen may be imported upon paying certain duties;
but French linen is altogether prohibited. The principles which I have
been examining took their origin from private interest and the spirit of
 monopoly; those which I am going to examine from national prejudice and
 animosity.’]</p></li>
<li><p>[See Anderson, <i>Commerce,</i> <span class="sc"><span class="entity ad">ad</span></span> 1601, and see above, pp. 398-399.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘a great part’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘The course of exchange, at least as it has hitherto been estimated, is, perhaps, almost equally so.’]</p></li>
<li><p>[Here and three lines above eds. 1 and 2 read ‘it’ instead of ‘that other’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘common’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[This
 paragraph is absent in ed. 1, but the substance of it occurs in a
paragraph lower down, omitted in ed. 2 and later eds. See below, p. 452,
 note 3.]</p></li>
<li><p>[In
 place of this paragraph ed. 1 reads, ‘But though this doctrine, of
which some part is, perhaps, not a little doubtful, were supposed ever
so certain, the manner in which the par of exchange has hitherto been
computed renders uncertain every conclusion that has ever yet been drawn
 from it’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘standards’ here and seven lines lower.]</p></li>
<li><p>[See above p. 194.]</p></li>
<li><p>[This erroneous statement has already been made, vol. i., p. 47; see below, vol. ii., p. 53, for details.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Already mentioned above, vol. i., p. 311.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 2 and later eds. read erroneously ‘of the two’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[See the preface to the 4th ed., above.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘Those deposits of coin, or which’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Eds. 1-3 have the more correct but awkward reading ‘than of those of gold’.]</p></li>
<li><p>The
 following are the prices at which the bank of Amsterdam at present
(September 1775) receives bullion and coin of different kinds:</p>
<table summary="lf0206-01_table_006">
<colgroup>
<col class="col1" span="1" align="left"/>
<col class="col2" span="1" align="right"/>
<col class="col3" span="1" align="right"/>
<col class="col4" span="1" align="right"/>
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>SILVER.</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Mexico dollars }</td>
<td colspan="3">Guilders.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>French crowns }</td>
<td>B—22</td>
<td colspan="2">per mark.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>English silver coin }</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Mexico dollars new coin</td>
<td></td>
<td>21</td>
<td>10</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Ducatoons</td>
<td></td>
<td>3</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Rix dollars</td>
<td></td>
<td>2</td>
<td>8</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<p id="Smith_0206-01_2193">Bar silver containing 11/12 fine silver 21 per mark, and in this proportion down to ¼ fine, on which 5 guilders are given.</p><p id="Smith_0206-01_2194">Fine bars, 23 per mark.</p>

<table summary="lf0206-01_table_007">
<colgroup>
<col class="col1" span="1" align="left"/>
<col class="col2" span="1" align="right"/>
<col class="col3" span="1" align="right"/>
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>GOLD.</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Portugal coin }</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Guineas }</td>
<td>B—310</td>
<td>per mark.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Louis d’ors new }</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Ditto old</td>
<td>300</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>New ducats</td>
<td></td>
<td>4 19 8 per ducat.</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<p id="Smith_0206-01_2195">Bar or ingot gold is received in proportion
to its fineness compared with the above foreign gold coin. Upon fine
bars the bank gives 340 per mark. In general, however, something more is
 given upon coin of a known fineness, than upon gold and silver bars, of
 which the fineness cannot be ascertained but by a process of melting
and assaying.</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘it’ here.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Lectures,</i> pp. 193, 194. The story is doubtless in Voltaire, <i>Siècle de Louis XIV.,</i> chap. x., and is quoted thence by Anderson, <i>Commerce,</i> <span class="sc"><span class="entity ad">ad</span></span> 1672.]</p></li>
<li><p>[N. Magens, <i>Universal Merchant,</i>
 ed. Horsley, pp. 32, 33, who also protests against the common
exaggeration, gives 3,000 as a maximum estimate for the number of
accounts, and 60,000,000 guilders as the utmost amount of the treasure.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed.
 1 runs on here as follows, ‘But though the computed exchange must
generally be in favour of the former, the real exchange may frequently
be in favour of the latter.’]</p></li>
<li><p>[In
 place of this part heading (see above, p. 437, note) ed. 1 reads, in
square-bracketed italics, ‘End of the Digression concerning Banks of
Deposit’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[In
 place of this first line ed. 1 reads, ‘Though the computed exchange
between any two places were in every respect the same with the real, it
would not always follow that what is called the balance of trade was in
favour of that place which had the ordinary course of exchange in its
favour. The ordinary course of exchange might, indeed, in this case, be a
 tolerable indication of the ordinary state of debt and credit between
them, and show which of the two countries usually had occasion to send
out money to the other. But the ordinary state of debt and credit
between any two places is not always entirely regulated by the ordinary
course of their dealings with one another, but is influenced by that of
the dealings of both with many other countries. If it was usual, for
example, for the merchants of England to pay the goods which they buy
from Hamburgh, Dantzick, Riga, &amp;c., by bills upon Holland, the
ordinary state of debt and credit between England and Holland would not
be entirely regulated by the ordinary course of the dealings of those
two countries with one another, but would be influenced by that of
England with those other places. England might, in this case, be
annually obliged to send out money to Holland, though its annual exports
 to that country exceeded the annual value of its imports from it, and
though what is called the balance of trade was very much in favour of
England.</p><p id="Smith_0206-01_2202">‘Hitherto I have been endeavouring to shew.’ See above, p. 440, note 3.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Below, vol. ii., pp. 7, 8.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 does not contain ‘and preparing for the market’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, p. 349.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Eds. 1 and 2 read ‘make’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘from either’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Lectures,</i> p. 179.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, p. 347.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Below, vol. ii., p. 178.]</p></li>
<li><p>[See below, vol. ii., p. 389.]</p></li>
<li><p>[See below, vol. ii., p. 422.]</p></li>
<li><p>[This and the preceding paragraph appear first in Additions and Corrections and ed. 3.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, vol. i., p. 320; <i>Lectures,</i> p. 207.]</p></li>
<li><p>This
 paragraph was written in the year 1775. [But not exactly as it stands,
since ed. 1 reads ‘the late disturbances’ instead of ‘the present
disturbances’. We can only conjecture that Smith thought that the
disturbances were past either when he was writing or when he returned
the proof to the printers, or that they would be past by the time his
book was published. The alteration of ‘late’ to ‘present’ was made in
ed. 2, and the footnote added in ed. 3. In vol. ii. all eds. read
‘present disturbances’ on pp. 75, 86 and 115 and ‘late disturbances’ on
p. 79. The two expressions could scarcely have been used at the same
time, so we must suppose that ‘late’ was corrected into ‘present’ on pp.
 75, 86 and 115, or that ‘present’ was corrected into ‘late’ on p. 79,
but we cannot tell for certain which of the two things happened.]</p></li>

<li><p>[Eds. 1 and 2 read ‘go to it’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The next three pages are not in eds. 1 and 2; see below, p. 5, note.]</p></li>
<li><p>[12 Car. II., c. 4.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Henry Saxby, <i>The British Customs, containing an Historical and Practical Account of each branch of that part of the Revenue,</i> 1757, pp. 10, 308.]</p></li>
<li><p>[These figures are also quoted above, vol. i., p. 352, and below, p. 103.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Saxby, <i>British Customs,</i> p. 12.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Ibid.,</i> p. 11.]</p></li>
<li><p>[6 Geo. III., c. 28; 11 Geo. III., c. 49.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, vol. i., p. 437.]</p></li>
<li><p>[7 and 8 W. III., c. 20; 1 Geo. I., c. 12., § 3; Saxby, <i>British Customs,</i> p. 45; above vol. i., p. 437. The first 25 per cent. was imposed in 1692, the second in 1696.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Saxby, <i>British Customs,</i>
 pp. 13, 22, 39, 46. ‘The additional duty’ was imposed in 1703. For the
‘impost 1692’ and the subsidies see above, vol. i., pp. 437, 438, and
below, pp. 363, 364. ‘The coinage on wine’ was the duty levied under 18
Car. II., c. 5, for defraying the expenses of the mint.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Saxby, <i>British Customs,</i> pp. 13, 38.]</p></li>
<li><p>[1 Jac. II., c. 3, and continuing Acts: £8 a tun on French and £12 on other wine.]</p></li>
<li><p>[7 and 8 W. III., c. 20, § 3; 1 Geo. I., st. 2, c. 12, § 3.]</p></li>
<li><p>[18 Geo. II., c. 9; Saxby, <i>British Customs,</i> p. 64: £8 a tun on French and £4 on other wine.]</p></li>
<li><p>[? 1762. 3 Geo. III., c. 12: £8 a tun on French and £4 on other wine.]</p></li>
<li><p>[18 Geo. III., c. 27: £8 8s. on French and £4 4s. on other wine.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>I.e.,</i>
 5 per cent., not on the value of the goods, but on the amount of the
previously existing duties, 19 Geo. III., c. 25, and 22 Geo. III., c.
66.]</p></li>
<li><p>[20 Geo. III., c. 30: £8 a tun on French and £4 on other wine.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The
 colonial part of the Act is said in its particular preamble (§ 5) to be
 for the purpose of ‘maintaining a greater correspondence and kindness
between’ the colonies and mother country, and for keeping the colonies
‘in a firmer dependence’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[All this is dealt with in greater detail below, pp. 78-81.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The
 framers of the Act were not so sure about Madeira being non-European.
They excepted wine of the Madeiras and Azores by special provision, § 7
of 15 Car. II., c. 7, § 13.]</p></li>
<li><p>[From
 the words ‘duty upon importation’ at the end of the first sentence of
the third paragraph of the chapter to this point is new matter, which
appears first in Additions and Corrections and ed. 3. Eds. 1 and 2 read
in place of it simply, ‘Half the duties imposed by what is called the
old subsidy, are drawn back universally, except upon goods exported to
the British plantations, and frequently the whole, almost always a part
of those imposed by later subsidies and imposts’. The provision of 4
Geo. III., c. 15, taking away drawbacks, is quoted below, p. 85.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Below, pp. 84-86.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Charles Smith (already described as ‘very well-informed’ above, vol. 1., p. 426), <i>Three Tracts on the Corn Trade and Corn Laws,</i> 2nd ed., 1766, pp. 132-138.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, vol. i., pp. 195-198.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, vol. i., pp. 197-210, and cp. p. 403.]</p></li>
<li><p>[These three sentences beginning with ‘It has happened in France,’ appear first in Additions and Corrections and ed. 3.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, vol. i., p. 197.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Eds.
 1 and 2 read (beginning at the third line of the paragraph) ‘But it has
 been thought by many people, that by securing to the farmer a better
price than he could otherwise expect in the actual state of tillage, it
tends to encourage tillage; and that the consequent increase of corn
may, in a long period of years, lower its price more than the bounty can
 raise it in the actual state which tillage may at the end of that
period happen to be in.’ The alteration is given in Additions and
Corrections. The next two paragraphs appear first in Additions and
Corrections and ed. 3.]</p></li>
<li><p>[It
 is really anything but a moderate supposition. It is not at all likely
that the increase of demand caused by the offer of a bounty on
exportation would raise the price of a commodity to the extent of
four-fifths of the bounty.]</p></li>
<li><p>[C. Smith, <i>Three Tracts on the Corn Trade,</i> 2nd ed., p. 144.]</p></li>
<li><p>[This and the preceding paragraph are not in eds. 1 and 2. See above, p. 9, note 5.]</p></li>
<li><p>[See
 above, vol. i., pp. 32-40. It does not occur to Smith that the
additional corn might require greater labour to produce it than an equal
 quantity of the old.]</p></li>
<li><p>[In
 place of this and the preceding sentence eds. 1 and 2 read only ‘It is
not the real but the nominal price of corn only which can be at all
affected by the bounty.’ The alteration is given in Additions and
Corrections.]</p></li>
<li><p>[‘Home-made’ here and in the line above is not in eds. 1 and 2.]</p></li>
<li><p>[‘Almost’ is not in eds. 1 and 2.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Eds. 1 and 2 do not contain ‘home-made’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Eds. 1 and 2 read ‘in the smallest degree’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Neither ‘much’ is in eds. 1 and 2.]</p></li>
<li><p>[This
 and the two preceding sentences from ‘in the purchase’ appear first in
Additions and Corrections (which reads ‘of even’ instead of ‘even of’)
and ed. 3.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Spain’s
 prohibition of exportation of gold and silver had only been abolished
at a recent period. The tax was 3 per cent. till 1768, then 4 per cent.
See Raynal, <i>Histoire philosophique,</i> Amsterdam ed. 1773, tom. iii., pp. 290, 291. As to the export of gold from Portugal, see below, p. 48, note 1.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Essay
 on the Causes of the Decline of the Foreign Trade, consequently of the
Value of the Lands of Britain, and on the means to restore both,</i> 2nd ed., 1750, pp. 55, 171.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Eds. 1 and 2 read ‘not the real but only the nominal price’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Eds. 1 and 2 read ‘the smallest real service’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Eds. 1 and 2 read ‘a very real service’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[‘Home-made’ is not in eds. 1 and 2.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Eds. 1 and 2 read ‘will be merely nominal’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Eds. 1 and 2 read ‘could be really serviceable’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Eds. 1 and 2 read ‘a real value which no human institution can alter’. Cp. p. 11.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘raise it’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Eds.
 1 and 2 read ‘They loaded the public revenue with a very considerable
expence, but they did not in any respect increase’. The alteration is
given in Additions and Corrections.]</p></li>
<li><p>[In
 place of this and the two preceding sentences (beginning ‘It would
besides’) eds. 1 and 2 read only ‘It has, however, been more rarely
granted.’ The alteration is given in Additions and Corrections.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Eds. 1 and 2 read ‘The encouragements given’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The
 whale fishery bounty under 11 Geo. III., c. 38, was 40s per ton for the
 first five years, 30s. for the second five years, and 20s. for the
third.]</p></li>
<li><p>[‘It may be supposed’ is not in eds. 1 and 2.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Eds. 1 and 2 read ‘would be in the actual state of production’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[‘It must be acknowledged’ is not in eds. 1 and 2.]</p></li>
<li><p>[‘Tonnage’ is not in eds. 1 and 2.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Eds. 1 and 2 read ‘they may perhaps be defended as conducing to its defence’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Eds. 1 and 2 read ‘This may frequently be done’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Eds. 1 and 2 read ‘in time of peace’ here.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The
 next four pages, to page 24 line 10, are not in eds. 1 and 2, which
read in place of them ‘Some other bounties may be vindicated perhaps
upon the same principle. It is of importance that the kingdom should
depend as little as possible upon its neighbours for the manufactures
necessary for its defence; and if these cannot otherwise be maintained
at home, it is reasonable that all other branches of industry should be
taxed in order to support them. The bounties upon the importation of
naval stores from America, upon British made sail-cloth, and upon
British made gunpowder, may perhaps all three be vindicated upon this
principle. The first is a bounty upon the production of America, for the
 use of Great Britain. The two others are bounties upon exportation.’
The new paragraphs, with the two preceding paragraphs as amended, are
given in Additions and Corrections.]</p></li>
<li><p>[In Additions and Corrections the term is ‘seasteeks,’ as in the Appendix.]</p></li>
<li><p>See the accounts at the end of the volume. [In Additions and Corrections they are printed in the text.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The ten paragraphs ending here are not in eds. 1 and 2. See above, p. 19, note 9.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Eds. 1 and 2 read ‘When that form has been altered by manufacture of any kind, they are called bounties.’]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, vol. i., p. 199.]</p></li>
<li><p>[This heading is not in ed. 1.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Not a misprint for ‘enables’. There are two knowledges, one of the state of the crop and the other of the daily sales.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, vol. i., p. 159; below, p. 135.]</p></li>
<li><p>[‘Any
 corn growing in the fields, or any other corn or grain, butter, cheese,
 fish or other dead victuals whatsoever’. But grain was exempted when
below certain prices, <i>e.g.,</i> wheat, 6s. 8d. the quarter.]</p></li>
<li><p>[This
 and the preceding sentence are misleading. The effect of the provisions
 quoted in the preceding paragraph would have been to ‘annihilate
altogether’ the trade of the corn merchant if they had been left
unqualified. To avoid this consequence 5 and 6 Ed. VI., c. 14, § 7,
provides that badgers, laders, kidders or carriers may be licensed to
buy corn with the intent to sell it again in certain circumstances. So
that the licensing of kidders was a considerable alleviation, not, as
the text suggests, an aggravation.]</p></li>
<li><p>[5 Eliz., c. 12, § 4.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed.
 1 reads ‘the consumer or his immediate factors’. It should be noticed
that under 5 and 6 Edward VI., c. 14, § 7, the kidder might sell in
‘open fair or market’ as well as to consumers privately.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Diligent search has hitherto failed to discover these statutes.]</p></li>
<li><p>[§
 4 incorrectly quoted. The words are ‘not forestalling nor selling the
same in the same market within three months’. Under 5 and 6 Ed. VI., c.
14, a person buying and selling again ‘in any fair or market holden or
kept in the same place or in any other fair or market within four miles’
 was a regrator, while a forestaller was one who bought or contracted to
 buy things on their way to market, or made any motion for enhancing the
 price of such things or preventing them going to market.]</p></li>
<li><p>[12
 Geo. III., c. 71, repeals 5 and 6 Ed. VI., c. 14, but does not mention
15 Car. II., c. 7, which is purely permissive. If 15 Car. II., c. 7,
remained of any force in this respect it must have been merely in
consequence of the common law being unfavourable to forestalling.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Eds. 1 and 2 read ‘attends’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Charles Smith, <i>Three Tracts on the Corn Trade and Corn Laws,</i> 2nd ed., 1766, p. 145. The figures have been already quoted above, vol. i., p. 426.]</p></li>
<li><p>[‘The
 export is bare one thirty-second part of the consumption, one
thirty-third part of the growth exclusive of seed, one thirty-sixth part
 of the growth including the seed.’—<i>Ibid.,</i> p. 144; quoted above, p. 10.]</p></li>
<li><p>[This
 was not the first law of its kind. 3 Ed. IV., c. 2, was enacted because
 ‘the labourers and occupiers of husbandry within this realm of England
be daily grievously endamaged by bringing of corn out of other lands and
 parts into this realm of England when corn of the growing of this realm
 is at a low price,’ and forbids importation of wheat when not over 6s.
8d., rye when not over 4s. and barley when not over 3s. the quarter.
This Act was repealed by 21 Jac. I., c. 28, and 15 Car. II., c. 7,
imposed a duty of 5s. 4d. on imported wheat, 4s. on rye, 2s. 8d. on
barley, 2s. on buckwheat, 1s. 4d. on oats and 4s. on pease and beans,
when the prices at the port of importation did not exceed for wheat,
48s.; barley and buckwheat, 28s.; oats, 13s. 4d.; rye, pease and beans,
32s. per quarter.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘restrained by duties proportionably’.]</p></li>
<li><p>Before the 13th of the present king, the following were the duties payable upon the importation of the different sorts of grain:</p>

<table summary="lf0206-02_table_001">
<colgroup>
<col class="col1" span="1" align="left"/>
<col class="col2" span="1" align="left"/>
<col class="col3" span="1" align="right"/>
<col class="col4" span="1" align="right"/>
<col class="col5" span="1" align="left"/>
<col class="col6" span="1" align="right"/>
<col class="col7" span="1" align="right"/>
<col class="col8" span="1" align="right"/>
<col class="col9" span="1" align="left"/>
<col class="col10" span="1" align="right"/>
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td colspan="2"><i>Grain.</i></td>
<td colspan="2"><i>Duties.</i></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td colspan="2"><i>Duties.</i></td>
<td colspan="2"><i>Duties.</i></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Beans to</td>
<td>28s. per qr.</td>
<td>19s.</td>
<td>10d.</td>
<td>after till</td>
<td>40s.</td>
<td>16s.</td>
<td>8d.</td>
<td>then</td>
<td>12d.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Barley to</td>
<td>28s.</td>
<td>19s.</td>
<td>10d.</td>
<td></td>
<td>32s.</td>
<td>16s.</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td>12d.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="6">Malt is prohibited by the annual Malt-tax Bill.</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Oats to</td>
<td>16s.</td>
<td>5s.</td>
<td>10d.</td>
<td>after</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td>9½d.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Pease to</td>
<td>40s.</td>
<td>16s.</td>
<td>0d.</td>
<td>after</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td>9¾d.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Rye to</td>
<td>36s.</td>
<td>19s.</td>
<td>10d.</td>
<td>till</td>
<td>40s.</td>
<td>16s.</td>
<td>8d.</td>
<td>then</td>
<td>12d.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Wheat to</td>
<td>44s.</td>
<td>21s.</td>
<td>9d.</td>
<td>till</td>
<td>53s. 4d.</td>
<td>17s.</td>
<td></td>
<td>then</td>
<td>8s.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="5">till 4l. and after that about 1s. 4d.</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="5">Buck wheat to 32s. per qr. to pay 16s.</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<p id="Smith_0206-02_1138">These different duties were imposed, partly
by the 22d of Charles II. in place of the Old Subsidy, partly by the New
 Subsidy, by the One-third and Two-thirds Subsidy, and by the Subsidy
1747. [The table of duties in this note is an exact copy of that in
Charles Smith, <i>Three Tracts on the Corn Trade,</i> 2nd ed., 1766, p. 83. That author professes to have taken the figures from ‘Mr. Saxby, in his Book of Rates’ (<i>i.e.,</i> Henry Saxby, <i>The British Customs, containing an Historical and Practical Account of each branch of that Revenue,</i>
 1757, pp. 111-114), but besides rounding off Saxby’s fractions of a
penny in an inaccurate and inconsistent manner, he has miscopied the
second duty on barley, the first on pease and the third on wheat. The
‘Old Subsidy’ consisted of the 5 per cent. or 1s. poundage imposed by 12
 Car. II., c. 4, on the values attributed to the various goods by the
‘Book of Rates’ annexed to the Act. According to this, imported beans,
barley and malt were to be rated at 26s. 8d. the quarter when the actual
 price at the place of importation did not exceed 28s. When the actual
price was higher than that they were to be rated at 5s. the quarter.
Oats and pease were to be rated at 4s. the quarter. Rye when not over
36s. was to be rated at 26s. 8d., and when over that price at 5s. Wheat
when not over 44s. was to be rated at 40s., and when over that price at
6s. 8d.</p><p id="Smith_0206-02_1139">So under the Old Subsidy:—</p>
<blockquote>
<p id="Smith_0206-02_1140">Beans, barley and malt at prices up to 28s. were to pay 1s. 4d., and when above that price 3d.</p><p id="Smith_0206-02_1141">Oats and pease to pay 2·4d.</p><p id="Smith_0206-02_1142">Rye up to 36s. to pay 1s. 4d., and when above, 3d.</p><p id="Smith_0206-02_1143">Wheat up to 44s. to pay 2s., and when above, 4d.</p>
</blockquote>
<p id="Smith_0206-02_1144">The Act 22 Car. II., c. 13, took off these duties and substituted the following scheme:—</p>
<blockquote>
<p id="Smith_0206-02_1145">Beans to 40s. to pay 16s., and above that price, 3d.</p><p id="Smith_0206-02_1146">Barley and malt to 32s. to pay 16s., and above, 3d.</p><p id="Smith_0206-02_1147">Oats to 16s. to pay 5s. 4d., and above, 2·4d.</p><p id="Smith_0206-02_1148">Pease and rye the same as beans.</p><p id="Smith_0206-02_1149">Wheat to 53s. 4d. to pay 16s., then to 80s. to pay 8s., and above that price, 4d.</p><p id="Smith_0206-02_1150">Buckwheat to 32s. to pay 16s.</p>
</blockquote>
<p id="Smith_0206-02_1151">But 9 and 10 Will. III., c. 23, imposed a
‘New Subsidy’ exactly equal to the Old, so that duties equal to those of
 12 Car. II., c. 4, were superimposed on those of 22 Car. II., c. 13. By
 2 and 3 Ann., c. 9, an additional third, and by 3 and 4 Ann., c. 5, an
additional two-thirds of the Old Subsidy were imposed, and by 21 Geo.
II., c. 2, another amount equal to the Old Subsidy (‘the impost 1747’)
was further imposed. So between 1747 and 1773 the duties were those of
22 Car. II., c. 13, <i>plus</i> three times those of 12 Car. II., c. 4. This gives the following scheme:—</p>
<blockquote>
<p id="Smith_0206-02_1152">Beans to 28s. pay 20s. and after till 40s. pay 16s. 9d. then 1s.</p><p id="Smith_0206-02_1153">Barley to 28s. pays 20s. and after till 32s. pays 16s. 9d. then 1s.</p><p id="Smith_0206-02_1154">Oats to 16s. pay 5s. 11·2d. and then pay 9·6d.</p><p id="Smith_0206-02_1155">Pease to 40s. pay 16s. 7·2d. and then pay 9·6d.</p><p id="Smith_0206-02_1156">Rye to 36s. pays 20s. and after till 40s. pays 16s. 9d. then 1s.</p><p id="Smith_0206-02_1157">Wheat to 44s. pays 22s. and after till 53s. 4d. pays 17s. then 9s. till 80s., and after that 1s. 4d.</p>
</blockquote>
<p id="Smith_0206-02_1158">Saxby’s figures are slightly less, as they
take into account a 5 per cent. discount obtainable on all the subsidies
 except one. The note appears first in ed. 2.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Eds.
 1 and 2 do not contain ‘subsequent laws still further increased those
duties,’ and read ‘the distress which in years of scarcity the strict
execution of this statute might have brought’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[These do not seem to have been numerous. There were cases in 1757 and 1766. See the table in Charles Smith, <i>Three Tracts upon the Corn Trade and Corn Laws,</i> 2nd ed., pp. 44, 45.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Eds. 1 and 2 read ‘extend its cultivation’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Earlier
 statutes are 15 Hen. VI., c. 2; 20 Hen. VI., c. 6; 23 Hen. VI., c. 6; 1
 and 2 P. and M., c. 5; 5 Eliz., c. 5. § 26; 13 Eliz., c. 13; and 1
Jac., c. 25, §§ 26, 27. The preamble of the first of these says ‘by the
law it was ordained that no man might carry nor bring corn out of the
realm of England without the King’s licence, for cause whereof farmers
and other men which use manurement of their land may not sell their corn
 but of a bare price to the great damage of all the realm’. Exportation
was therefore legalised without licence when grain was above certain
prices.]</p></li>
<li><p>[C. 7.]</p></li>
<li><p>[C. 13.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The
 ‘Book of Rates’ (see above, p. 38, note) rated wheat for export at
20s., oats at 6s. 8d., and other grain at 10s. the quarter, and the duty
 was a shilling in the pound on these values.]</p></li>
<li><p>[1 W. and M., c. 12. The bounty was to be given ‘without taking or requiring anything for custom’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Because as to inland sale 15 Car. II., c. 7 (above, p. 34), remained in force.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The
 Acts prohibiting exportation were much more numerous than the others.
See above, p. 39, note 2, and the table in Charles Smith there referred
to.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 does not contain ‘of the greater part of which there was no drawback’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[According to the argument above, p. 15.]</p></li>
<li><p>[See above, p. 13.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, vol. i., pp. 207-209.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘in one respect’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed.
 1 reads only ‘By this statute the high duties upon importation for home
 consumption are taken off as soon as the price of wheat is so high as
forty-eight shillings the quarter, and instead’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[In
 place of this sentence ed. 1 reads ‘The home market is in this manner
not so totally excluded from foreign supplies as it was before.’]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed.
 1 reads (from the beginning of the paragraph) ‘By the same statute the
old bounty of five shillings upon the quarter of wheat ceases when the
price rises so high as forty-four shillings, and upon that of other
grain in proportion. The bounties too upon the coarser sorts of grain
are reduced somewhat lower than they were before, even at the prices at
which they take place.’]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed.
 1 reads ‘The same statute permits at all prices the importation of corn
 in order to be exported again, duty free; provided it is in the
meantime lodged in the king’s warehouse.’]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 contains an additional sentence, ‘Some provision is thus made for the establishment of the carrying trade.’]</p></li>
<li><p>[This paragraph is not in ed. 1.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed.
 1 reads (from the beginning of the paragraph) ‘But by the same law
exportation is prohibited as soon as the price of wheat rises to
forty-four shillings the quarter, and that of other grain in proportion.
 The price seems to be a good deal too low, and there seems to be an
impropriety besides in stopping exportation altogether at the very same
price at which that bounty which was given in order to force it is
withdrawn.’]</p></li>
<li><p>[These two sentences are not in ed. 1.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>E.g.,</i> in the <i>British Merchant,</i> 1721, Dedication to vol. iii.]</p></li>
<li><p>[With
 three small exceptions, ‘British’ for ‘Britons’ and ‘law’ for ‘laws’ in
 art. 1, and ‘for’ instead of ‘from’ before ‘the like quantity or
measure of French wine,’ the translation is identical with that given in
 <i>A Collection of all the Treaties of Peace, Alliance and Commerce between Great Britain and other Powers from the Revolution in</i> 1688 <i>to the Present Time,</i> 1772, vol. i., pp. 61, 62.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Joseph Baretti, <i>Journey from London to Genoa, through England, Portugal, Spain and France,</i>
 3rd ed., 1770, vol. i., pp. 95, 96, but the amount stated is not so
large as in the text above: it is ‘often’ from ‘thirty to fifty and even
 sixty thousand pounds,’ and not ‘one week with another’ but ‘almost
every week’. The gold all came in the packet boat because it, as a war
vessel, was exempt from search.—Raynal, <i>Histoire philosophique,</i> Amsterdam ed. 1773, tom. iii., pp. 413, 414.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, vol. i., pp. 208, 209.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, vol. i., p. 349.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 does not contain ‘way’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[In 1762.]</p></li>
<li><p>[See above, vol. i., p. 43.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, vol. i., p. 285, note.]</p></li>
<li><p>See
 Dictionaire des Monnoies, tom. ii. article Seigneurage, p. 489. par M.
Abot de Bazinghen, Conseiller-Commissaire en la Cour des Monnoies à
Paris. [Ed. 1 reads erroneously ‘tom. i.’ The book is <i>Traité des Monnoies et de la jurisdiction de la Cour des Monnoies en forme de dictionnaire,</i>
 par M. Abot de Bazinghen, Conseiller-Commissaire en la Cour des
Monnoies de Paris, 1764, and the page is not 489, but 589. Garnier, in
his edition of the <i>Wealth of Nations,</i> vol. v.,
 p. 234, says the book ‘n’est guere qu’une compilation faite sans soin
et sans discernement,’ and explains that the mint price mentioned above
remained in force a very short time. It having failed to bring bullion
to the mint, much higher prices were successively offered, and when the <i>Wealth of Nations</i>
 was published the seignorage only amounted to about 3 per cent. On the
silver coin it was then about 2 per cent., in place of the 6 per cent.
stated by Bazinghen, p. 590.]</p></li>
<li><p>[‘An
 act for encouraging of coinage,’ 18 Car. II., c. 5. The preamble says,
‘Whereas it is obvious that the plenty of current coins of gold and
silver of this kingdom is of great advantage to trade and commerce; for
the increase whereof, your Majesty in your princely wisdom and care hath
 been graciously pleased to bear out of your revenue half the charge of
the coinage of silver money’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Originally
 enacted for five years, it was renewed by 25 Car. II., c. 8, for seven
years, revived for seven years by 1 Jac. II., c. 7, and continued by
various Acts till made perpetual by 9 Geo. III., c. 25.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘tear and wear’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, p. 51.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Under 19 Geo. II., c. 14, § 2, a maximum of £15,000 is prescribed.]</p></li>
<li><p>[‘Chiefly’ is not in ed. 1.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘that of Congo, Angola and Loango’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[P. F. X. de Charlevoix, <i>Histoire de l’Isle Espagnole ou de S. Domingue,</i> 1730, tom. i., p. 99.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Histoire Naturelle,</i> tom. xv. (1750), pp. 160, 162.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Charlevoix, <i>Histoire de l’Isle Espagnole,</i> tom. i., pp. 35, 36.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Ibid.,</i> p. 27.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, vol. i., p. 171.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed.
 1 (in place of these two sentences) reads, ‘The tax upon silver,
indeed, still continues to be a fifth of the gross produce.’ Cp. above,
vol. i., p. 170.]</p></li>
<li><p>[‘That
 mighty, rich and beautiful empire of Guiana, and . . . that great and
golden city which the Spaniards call El Dorado.’—Ralegh’s <i>Works,</i> ed. Thomas Birch, 1751, vol. ii., p. 141.]</p></li>
<li><p>[P. Jos. Gumilla, <i>Histoire naturelle civile et géographique de l’Orénoque, etc.,</i>
 traduite par M. Eidous, 1758, tom. ii., pp. 46, 117, 131, 132, 137,
138, but the sentiment is apparently attributed to the author, who is
described on the title page as ‘de la compagnie de Jésus, supérieur des
missions de l’Orenoque,’ on the strength of a mistranslation of the
French or possibly the original Spanish. If ‘Dieu permit’ were
mistranslated ‘God permit,’ the following passage from pp. 137, 138
would bear out the text: ‘On cherchait une vallée ou un territoire dont
les rochers et les pierres étaient d’or, et les Indiens pour flatter la
cupidité des Espagnols, et les éloigner en même temps de chez eux, leur
peignaient avec les couleurs les plus vives l’or dont ce pavs abondait
pour se débarrasser plutôt de ces hôtes incommodes, et Dieu permit que
les Espagnols ajoutassent foi à ces rapports, pour qu’ils découvrissent
un plus grand nombre de provinces, et que la lumière de l’Evangile pût
s’y répandre avec plus de facilité.’]</p></li>
<li><p>[Eds. 1-4 reads ‘support’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Miletus and Crotona.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘its’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[See above, vol. i., p. 203.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Juan and Ulloa, <i>Voyage historique,</i> tom. i., p. 229.]</p></li>
<li><p>[In Awnsham and John Churchill’s <i>Collection of Voyages and Travels,</i> 1704, vol. iv., p. 508.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Cp. above, vol. i., pp. 202, 203.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Raynal, <i>Histoire philosophique,</i> Amsterdam ed., 1773, tom. iii., pp. 347-352.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Ibid.,</i> tom. iii., p. 424.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Ibid.,</i> tom. vi., p. 8.]</p></li>
<li><p>[A mistake for 1664.]</p></li>
<li><p>[P. F. X. de Charlevoix, <i>Histoire et description générale de la Nouvelle France, avec le journal historique d’un voyage dans l’Amérique Septentrionnale,</i>
 1744, tom. ii., p. 300, speaks of a population of 20,000 to 25,000 in
1713. Raynal says in 1753 and 1758 the population, excluding troops and
Indians, was 91,000.—<i>Histoire philosophique,</i> Amsterdam ed., 1773, tom. vi., p. 137.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘the’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Eds. 1 and 2 read ‘their’.]</p></li>
<li><p>Jus Majoratus. [Ed. 1 reads ‘mayorazzo’ in the text and ‘mayoratus’ in the note.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, pp. 67, 68, and cp. vol. i., p. 94.]</p></li>
<li><p>[This and the preceding sentence, beginning ‘The plenty,’ are not in ed. 1.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed.
 1 reads ‘The engrossing, however, of uncultivated land, it has already
been observed, is the greatest obstruction to its improvement and
cultivation, and the labour’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘Its produce in this case’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[All eds. read ‘present’ here and on p. 86, but ‘late’ on p. 79. See above, vol. i., p. 462, note, and below, p. 423.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The figures are evidently from the ‘very exact account’ quoted below, p. 423.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Juan and Ulloa, <i>Voyage historique,</i> tom. i., pp. 437-441, give a lurid account of the magnificence of the ceremonial.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Maranon in 1755 and Fernambuco four years later.—Raynal, <i>Histoire philosophique,</i> Amsterdam ed., 1773, tom. iii., p. 402.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘This, however, has’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘said to be’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Iron sometimes at 100 écus the quintal and steel at 150.—Juan and Ulloa, <i>Voyage historique,</i> tom. i., p. 252.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘the same as that of Spain’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The
 commodities originally enumerated in 12 Car. II., c. 18, § 18, were
sugar, tobacco cotton-wool, indigo, ginger, fustic and other dyeing
woods.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, vol. i., pp. 149, 150, 219, 220.]</p></li>
<li><p>[See above, p. 75, note 1.]</p></li>
<li><p>[There seems to be some mistake here. The true date is apparently 1739, under the Act 12 Geo. II., c. 30.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ships not going to places south of Cape Finisterre were compelled to call at some port in Great Britain.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Garnier,
 in his note to this passage, tom. iii., p. 323, points out that the
islands ceded by the peace of Paris in 1763 were only Grenada and the
Grenadines, but that term here includes the other islands won during the
 war, St. Vincent, Dominica and Tobago, which are mentioned below, p.
428.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Rice was put in by 3 and 4 Ann, c. 5, and taken out by 3 Geo. II., c. 28; timber was taken out by 5 Geo. III., c. 45.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Anderson, <i>Commerce,</i> <span class="sc"><span class="entity ad">ad</span></span> 1703.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Details are given below, pp. 143, 144, in a chapter not contained in eds. 1 and 2.]</p></li>
<li><p>[23 Geo. II., c. 29.]</p></li>
<li><p>[23 Geo. II., c. 29. Anderson, <i>Commerce,</i> <span class="sc"><span class="entity ad">ad</span></span> 1750.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Hats under 5 Geo. II., c. 22; wools under 10 and 11 W. III., c. 10. See Anderson, <i>Commerce,</i> <span class="sc"><span class="entity ad">ad</span></span> 1732 and 1699.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Details are given below, pp. 143-146, in a chapter which was not in eds. 1 and 2.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, pp. 1-5.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The quotation is not quite <i>verbatim.</i> The provision is referred to above, p. 5, where, however, see note.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 does not contain the words ‘they approach more nearly to that character; and’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The
 Board of Trade and Plantations, in a report to the House of Commons in
1732, insisted on this democratic character of the government of some of
 the colonies, and mentioned the election of governor by Connecticut and
 Rhode Island: the report is quoted in Anderson, <i>Commerce,</i> <span class="sc"><span class="entity ad">ad</span></span> 1732.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The story is told in the same way in <i>Lectures,</i> p. 97, but Seneca, <i>De ira,</i> lib. iii., cap. 40, and Dio Cassius, <i>Hist.,</i>
 lib. liv., cap. 23, say, not that Augustus ordered all the slaves to be
 emancipated, but that he ordered all the goblets on the table to be
broken. Seneca says the offending slave was emancipated. Dio does not
mention emancipation.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘and industry’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The
 West India merchants and planters asserted, in 1775, that there was
capital worth £60,000,000 in the sugar colonies and that half of this
belonged to residents in Great Britain.—See the Continuation of
Anderson’s <i>Commerce,</i> <span class="sc"><span class="entity ad">ad</span></span> 1775.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Eds. 1 and 2 do not contain the words ‘so far as concerns their internal government’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘persecuted’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘with equal injustice’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Raynal, <i>Histoire philosophique,</i> Amsterdam ed., 1773, tom. iii., pp. 323, 324, 326, 327. Justamond’s English trans., vol. ii., p. 442.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Velasquez.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Cortez.]</p></li>
<li><p>[‘Salve magna parens frugum, Saturnia tellus, Magna virum.’—Virgil, <i>Georg,</i> ii., 173-174.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Eds. 1 and 2 do not contain the words ‘so far as concerns their internal government’. Cp. above, p. 89, note 4.]</p></li>
<li><p>[‘Not’
 appears first in ed. 3 and seems to have been inserted in error. The
other countries are only excluded from a particular market, but the
colonies are confined to one.]</p></li>
<li><p>[There is an example of revenue being furnished in Xenophon, <i>Anab.,</i> V., v., 7, 10.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, p. 76.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, p. 78.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, vol. i., p. 158.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, vol. i., pp. 427-429.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Essay
 on the Causes of the Decline of the Foreign Trade, consequently of the
Value of the Lands of Britain and on the means to restore both,</i> 2nd ed., 1750, pp. 28-36, <i>et passim.</i>]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘rate of the profit’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[This
 passage is much the same as that which concludes bk. i., ch. ix.,
above, vol. i., p. 100; but this is the original, as the other was not
in ed. 1.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, vol. i., p. 348.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘with a neighbouring country.’]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, vol. i., p. 349.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘with a neighbouring country’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[These figures are given above, vol. i., p. 352; vol. ii., p. 2.]</p></li>
<li><p>[These four sentences beginning with ‘At some of the outports’ are not in ed. 1.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘possesses’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 places ‘a popular measure’ here.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 does not contain ‘in all future times’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The date at which the non-importation agreement began to operate.]</p></li>
<li><p>[‘For
 the greater security of the valuable cargoes sent to America, as well
as for the more easy prevention of fraud, the commerce of Spain with its
 colonies is carried on by fleets which sail under strong convoys. These
 fleets, consisting of two squadrons, one distinguished by the name of
the “Galeons,” the other by that of the “Flota,” are equipped annually.
Formerly they took their departure from Seville; but as the port of
Cadiz has been found more commodious, they have sailed from it since the
 year 1720.’—W. Robertson, <i>History of America,</i> bk. viii.; in <i>Works,</i> 1825, vol. vii., p. 372.]</p></li>
<li><p>[By the treaty of Kainardji, 1774.]</p></li>
<li><p>[In 1773.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘prevent it’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Eds. 1 and 2 read ‘and employment’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘have entirely conquered’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘own capital’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘extremely fit for a nation that is governed by shopkeepers. Such sovereigns and such sovereigns only’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘their subjects, to found and to maintain’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘is’ here and two lines lower down.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘and a great part of that which preceded it’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Below, p. 333.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘seem’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[‘Aucun
 des règnes précédents n’a fourni plus de volumes, plus d’anecdotes,
plus d’estampes, plus de pièces fugitives, etc. Il y a dans tout cela
bien des choses inutiles; mais comme Henri III. vivait au milieu de son
peuple, aucun détail des actions de sa vie n’a echappé à la curiosité;
et comme Paris était le théâtre des principaux événements de la ligue,
les bourgeois qui y avaient la plus grande part, conservaient
soigneusement les moindres faits qui se passaient sous leurs yeux; tout
ce qu’ils voyaient leur paraissait grand, parce qu’ils y participaient,
et nous sommes curieux, sur parole, de faits dont la plupart ne
faisaient peut-être pas alors une grande nouvelle dans le monde.’—C. J.
F. Hénault, <i>Nouvel Abrégé chronologique de l’histoire de France,</i> nouv. éd., 1768, p. 473, <span class="sc"><span class="entity ad">ad</span></span> 1589.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Eds. 4 and 5 erroneously insert ‘to’ here.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Eds. 1-3 read ‘was’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Eds. 1-3 read ‘was’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘nations’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Raynal begins his <i>Histoire philosophique</i>
 with the words ‘Il n’y a point eu d’événement aussi intéressant pour
l’espèce humaine en géneral et pour les peuples de l’Europe en
particulier, que la découverte du nouveau monde et le passage aux Indes
par le Cap de Bonne-Espérance. Alors a commencé une révolution dans le
commerce, dans la puissance des nations, dans les mœurs, l’industrie et
le gouvernement de tous les peuples.’]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, vol. i., pp. 340, 354.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘distant employment’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[See below, p. 132.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The monopoly of the French East India Company was abolished in 1769.—See the Continuation of Anderson’s <i>Commerce,</i> 1801, vol. iv., p. 128.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Raynal, <i>Histoire philosophique,</i> ed. Amsterdam, 1773, tom. i., p. 203, gives the original capital as 6,459,840 florins.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Eds. 1-3 read ‘if it was’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘the principal branch’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Raynal, <i>Histoire philosophique,</i> 1773, tom. i., p. 178.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, pp. 76, 77.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘those’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 does not contain ‘are said to’. The statement has already been twice made, vol. i., p. 159, and vol. ii., p. 26.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘barbarous’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘the’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 does not contain these four sentences beginning ‘It is the interest’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Smith had in his library (see Bonar’s <i>Catalogue,</i> p. 15) William Bolts, <i>Considerations on India Affairs, particularly respecting the present state of Bengal and its Dependencies,</i>
 ed. 1772. Pt. i., ch. xiv., of this is ‘On the general modern trade of
the English in Bengal; on the oppressions and monopolies which have been
 the causes of the decline of trade, the decrease of the revenues, and
the present ruinous condition of affairs in Bengal’. At p. 215 we find
‘the servants of the Company . . . directly or indirectly monopolise
whatever branches they please of the internal trade of those
countries’.]</p></li>
<li><p>The
 interest of every proprietor of India Stock, however, is by no means
the same with that of the country in the government of which his vote
gives him some influence. See Book V. Chap. i. Part 3d. [This note
appears first in ed. 3, ed. 2 has the following note: ‘This would be
exactly true if those masters never had any other interest but that
which belongs to them as Proprietors of India stock. But they frequently
 have another of much greater importance. Frequently a man of great,
sometimes even a man of moderate fortune, is willing to give thirteen or
 fourteen hundred pounds (the present price of a thousand pounds share
in India stock) merely for the influence which he expects to acquire by a
 vote in the Court of Proprietors. It gives him a share, though not in
the plunder, yet in the appointment of the plunderers of India; the
Directors, though they make those appointments, being necessarily more
or less under the influence of the Court of Proprietors, which not only
elects them, but sometimes over-rules their appointments. A man of great
 or even a man of moderate fortune, provided he can enjoy this influence
 for a few years, and thereby get a certain number of his friends
appointed to employments in India, frequently cares little about the
dividend which he can expect from so small a capital, or even about the
improvement or loss of the capital itself upon which his vote is
founded. About the prosperity or ruin of the great empire, in the
government of which that vote gives him a share, he seldom cares at all.
 No other sovereigns ever were, or from the nature of things ever could
be, so perfectly indifferent about the happiness or misery of their
subjects, the improvement or waste of their dominions, the glory or
disgrace of their administration, as, from irresistible moral causes,
the greater part of the Proprietors of such a mercantile Company are,
and necessarily must be.’ This matter with some slight alterations
reappears in the portion of bk. v., chap. i., part iii., art. 1st, which
 was added in ed. 3 below, p. 243.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘ignorance only’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘have commonly been well meaning’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘if’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Eds. 1 and 2 read ‘were’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[This chapter appears first in Additions and Corrections and ed. 3.]</p></li>
<li><p>[C. 4.]</p></li>
<li><p>[C. 14.]</p></li>
<li><p>[3 Car. I., c. 4; 13 and 14 Car. II., c. 19.]</p></li>
<li><p>[From Ireland, 12 Geo. II., c. 21; 26 Geo. II., c. 8. Spanish wool for clothing and Spanish felt wool.—Saxby, <i>British Customs,</i> p. 263.]</p></li>
<li><p>[6 Geo. III., c. 52, § 20.]</p></li>
<li><p>[4 Geo. II., c. 27.]</p></li>
<li><p>[8 Geo. I., c. 15, § 10; see below, p. 155.]</p></li>
<li><p>[9 Geo. III., c. 39, § 1, continued by 14 Geo. III., c. 86, § 11, and 21 Geo. III., c. 29, § 3.]</p></li>
<li><p>[15 Geo. III., c. 31, § 10.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, p. 82.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Smith
 has here inadvertently given the rates at which the articles were
valued in the ‘Book of Rates,’ 12 Car. II., c. 4, instead of the duties,
 which would be 20 per cent. on the rates. See below, pp. 363, 364.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, vol. i., p. 437.]</p></li>
<li><p>[10 Geo. III., c. 38, and 19 Geo. III., c. 27.]</p></li>
<li><p>[3 and 4 Ann, c. 10.—Anderson, <i>Commerce,</i> <span class="sc"><span class="entity ad">ad</span></span> 1703.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Masting-timber
 (and also tar, pitch and rosin), under 12 Ann, st. 1, c. 9, and
masting-timber only under 2 Geo. II., c. 35, § 12. The encouragement of
the growth of hemp in Scotland is mentioned in the preamble of 8 Geo.
I., c. 12, and is presumably to be read into the enacting portion.]</p></li>
<li><p>[8 Geo. I., c. 12; 2 Geo. II., c. 35, §§ 3, 11.]</p></li>
<li><p>[3 Geo. III., c. 25.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Additions and Corrections omits ‘that’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The third bounty.]</p></li>
<li><p>[William Hawkins, <i>Treatise of the Pleas of the Crown,</i> 4th ed., 1762, bk. i., chap. 52.]</p></li>
<li><p>[So far from doing so, it expressly provides that any greater penalties already prescribed shall remain in force.]</p></li>
<li><p>[12 Car. II., c. 32.]</p></li>
<li><p>[4 Geo. I., c. 11, § 6.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Presumably
 the reference is to 10 and 11 W. III., c. 10, § 18, but this applies to
 the commander of a king’s ship conniving at the offence, not to the
master of the offending vessel.]</p></li>
<li><p>[12 Geo. II., c. 21, § 10.]</p></li>
<li><p>[13 and 14 Car. II., c. 18, § 9, forbade removal of wool in any part of the country between 8 <span class="sc">p.m.</span> and 4 <span class="sc">a.m.</span> from March to September, and 5 <span class="sc">p.m.</span> and 7 <span class="sc">a.m.</span>
 from October to February. 7 and 8 W. III., c. 28, § 8, taking no notice
 of this, enacted the provision quoted in the text. The provision of 13
and 14 Car. II., c. 18, was repealed by 20 Geo. III., c. 55, which takes
 no notice of 7 and 8 W. III., c. 28.]</p></li>
<li><p>[All these provisions are from 7 and 8 W. III., c. 28.]</p></li>
<li><p>[9 and 10 W. III., c. 40.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The quotation is not <i>verbatim.</i>]</p></li>
<li><p>[‘It is well known that the real very superfine cloth everywhere must be entirely of Spanish wool.’—Anderson, <i>Commerce,</i> <span class="sc"><span class="entity ad">ad</span></span> 1669.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, vol. i., pp. 230, 231.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Chronicon Rusticum-Commerciale; or Memoirs of Wool,</i> etc., 1767, vol. ii., p. 418, note.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, vol. i., p. 233.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Additions and Corrections reads ‘the wool’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[12 Car. II., c. 32; 13 and 14 Car. II., c. 18.]</p></li>
<li><p>[13
 and 14 Car. II., c. 18, § 8. The preamble to the clause alleges that
‘great quantities of fuller’s earth or fulling clay are daily carried
and exported under the colour of tobacco-pipe clay’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The
 preamble says that ‘notwithstanding the many good laws before this time
 made and still in force, prohibiting the exportation of leather . . .
by the cunning and subtlety of some persons and the neglect of others
who ought to take care thereof; there are such quantities of leather
daily exported to foreign parts that the price of leather is grown to
those excessive rates that many artificers working leather cannot
furnish themselves with sufficient store thereof for the carrying on of
their trades, and the poor sort of people are not able to buy those
things made of leather which of necessity they must make use of’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[20 Car. II., c. 5; 9 Ann., c. 6, § 4.]</p></li>
<li><p>[9 Ann., c. 11, § 39, explained by 10 Ann., c. 26, § 6, and 12 Ann., st. 2, c. 9, § 64.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, vol. i., p. 128.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Except under certain conditions by 4 Ed. IV., c. 8; wholly by 7 Jac. I., c. 14, § 4.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Under 13 and 14 Car. II., c. 18, and 7 and 8 W. III., c. 28; above, p. 147.]</p></li>
<li><p>[See below, next page.]</p></li>
<li><p>[9 and 10 W. III., c. 28, professedly to prevent frauds.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The
 preamble to the Act next quoted in the text mentions 28 Ed. III., c. 5
(iron); 33 Hen. VIII., c. 7 (brass, copper, etc.), and 2 and 3 Ed. VI.,
c. 37 (bell-metal, etc.).]</p></li>
<li><p>[This Act is not printed in the ordinary collections, but the provision referred to is in Pickering’s index, <i>s.v.</i> Copper, and the clause is recited in a renewing Act, 12 Ann., st. 1, c. 18.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Under the general Act, 8 Geo. I., c. 15, mentioned immediately below.]</p></li>
<li><p>[12
 Car. II., c. 4, § 2, and 14 Car. II., c. 11, § 35. The 1 per cent. was
due on goods exported to ports in the Mediterranean beyond Malaga,
unless the ship had sixteen guns and other warlike equipment. See Saxby,
 <i>British Customs,</i> pp. 48, 51.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Sixpence in the pound on the values at which they are rated in the Act.]</p></li>
<li><p>[C. 32.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Anderson, <i>Commerce,</i> <span class="sc"><span class="entity ad">ad</span></span> 1758.]</p></li>
<li><p>[As is stated in the preamble.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The
 facts are given in the preamble to 8 Geo. I., c. 15, § 13. The old
subsidy, the new, the one-third and the two-thirds subsidies account for
 1s., and the additional impost for 4d.]</p></li>
<li><p>[See above, p. 2.]</p></li>
<li><p>8 Geo. I., c. 15. [The year should be 1721.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>I.e.</i> the hatters.]</p></li>
<li><p>[4 Geo. III., c. 9.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Under the same statute, 5 Geo. I., c. 27.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, p. 47.]</p></li>
<li><p>[This
 chapter appears first in Additions and Corrections and ed. 3, and is
doubtless largely due to Smith’s appointment in 1778 to the
Commissionership of Customs (Rae, <i>Life of Adam Smith,</i> p. 320). He had in his library W. Sims and R. Frewin, <i>The Rates of Merchandise,</i> 1782 (see Bonar, <i>Catalogue,</i> p. 27), and probably had access to earlier works, such as Saxby’s <i>British Customs,</i> 1757, which give the duties, etc., at earlier periods as well as references to the Acts of Parliament regulating them.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The Économistes or Physiocrats. Quesnay, Mirabeau and Mercier de la Rivière are mentioned below, pp. 171, 177.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed.
 1 places a full stop at ‘mercantile system’ and continues ‘That system,
 in its nature and essence a system of restraint and regulation, could
scarce fail’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[But,
 see below, p. 167, where the usefulness of the class is said to be
admitted. In his exposition of physiocratic doctrine, Smith does not
appear to follow any particular book closely. His library contained Du
Pont’s <i>Physiocratie, ou constitution naturelle du gouvernement le plus avantageux au genre humain,</i> 1768 (see Bonar, <i>Catalogue,</i> p. 92), and he refers lower down to La Rivière, <i>L’ordre naturel et essentiel des sociétés politiques,</i> 1767, but he probably relied largely on his recollection of conversations in Paris; see Rae, <i>Life of Adam Smith,</i> pp. 215-222.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘tear and wear’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘some other employment’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘degrades’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘repay him’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘above the funds destined’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘the greater must likewise be its maintenance and employment’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Misprinted ‘greater’ in ed. 5.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘of their foreign trade’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[See François Quesnay, <i>Tableau Œconomique,</i> 1758, reproduced in facsimile for the British Economic Association, 1894.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘at least to all appearance’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Bk. ii., ch. iii., vol. i., pp. 313-331.]</p></li>
<li><p>See Book I. Chap. I. [vol. i., pp. 7-8].</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, vol. i., p. 368.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, vol. i., p. 198, and vol. ii., p. 9.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>L’ordre naturel et essentiel des sociétés politiques,</i> 1767, a quarto of 511 pages, seems, as G. Schelle (<i>Du Pont de Nemours et l’école physiocratique,</i>
 1888, p. 46, note) remarks, not entitled to be called a ‘little book,’
but Smith may have been thinking of the edition in two vols., 12mo,
1767, nominally printed ‘à Londres chez Jean Nourse, libraire’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[‘Trois
 grandes inventions principales ont fondé stablement les sociétés,
indépendamment de tant d’autres qui les ont ensuite dotées et décorées.
Ces trois sont, 1° L’invention de l’écriture, qui seule donne à
l’humanité le pouvoir de transmettre, sans altération, ses lois, ses
pactes, ses annales et ses découvertes. 2° Celle de la monnaie, qui lie
tous les rapports entre les sociétés policées. La troisième enfin, qui
est due à notre âge, et dont nos neveux profiteront, est un derivé des
deux autres, et les complette également en perfectionnant leur objet:
c’est la découverte du Tableau économique, qui devenant désormais le
truchement universel, embrasse, et accorde toutes les portions ou
quotités correlatives, qui doivent entrer dans tous les calculs généraux
 de l’ordre économique.’—<i>Philosophie Rurale ou économie générale et politique de l’agriculture, pour servir de suite a l’Ami des Hommes,</i> Amsterdam, 1766, tom. i., pp. 52, 53.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Du Halde, <i>Description Géographique, etc., de la Chine,</i> tom. ii., p. 64.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘Mr. Langlet’.]</p></li>
<li><p>See the Journal of Mr. De Lange in Bell’s Travels, vol. ii. p. 258, 276 and 293. [<i>Travels from St. Petersburg in Russia to Diverse Parts of Asia,</i>
 by John Bell of Antermony, Glasgow, 1763. The mandarins requested the
Russians to cease ‘from importuning the council about their beggarly
commerce,’ p. 293. Smith was a subscriber to this book. The note is not
in ed. 1.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘sorts’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, vol. i., pp. 19-25.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Quesnay
 went further than this: ‘L’historien dit que le commerce qui se fit
dans l’intérieur de la Chine est si grand que celui de l’Europe ne peut
pas lui être comparé.’—<i>Oeuvres,</i> ed. Oncken, 1888, p. 603.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘as well as all the other’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘and in’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 does not contain ‘of’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Below, p. 322.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘from’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Montesquieu, <i>Esprit des lois,</i> liv. iv., chap. 8.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘that’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘more rich’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Lectures,</i> p. 231; Montesquieu, <i>Esprit des lois,</i> liv. xv., chap. 8.]</p></li>
<li><p>Plin. [<i>H.N.</i>] l. ix. c. 39.</p></li>
<li><p>Plin. [<i>H.N.</i>] l. viii. c. 48. [Neither this nor the preceding note is in ed. 1.]</p></li>
<li><p>[John Arbuthnot, <i>Tables of Ancient Coins, Weights and Measures,</i> 2nd ed., 1754, pp. 142-145.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, vol. i., p. 355.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘real value’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Lectures,</i> p. 14.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘is’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[What
 Thucydides says (ii., 97) is that no European or Asiatic nation could
resist the Scythians if they were united. Ed. 1 reads here and on next
page ‘Thucidides’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Lectures,</i> pp. 20, 21.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘a good deal of’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘or fifth’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘so short a’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[VII., 27.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Livy, v., 2.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Livy, iv., 59 <i>ad fin.</i>]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, p. 189.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘never can’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘at whose expence they are employed’. Repeated all but <i>verbatim</i> below, p. 261.]</p></li>
<li><p>Ed. 1 reads ‘is acquired’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[As
 ed. 1 was published at the beginning of March, 1776, this must have
been written less than a year after the outbreak of the war, which
lasted eight years.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The Seven Years’ War, 1756-1763. Ed. 1 reads ‘of which in the last war the valour appeared’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[‘This’ is probably a misprint for ‘his,’ the reading of eds. 1-3.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘which’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Almost certainly a misprint for ‘demonstrate,’ the reading of ed. 1.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Lectures,</i> p. 29. ‘Cromwel,’ which is Hume’s spelling, appears first in ed. 4 here, but above, p. 98, it is so spelt in all editions.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Lectures,</i> p. 263.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Hume, <i>History,</i>
 ed. of 1773, vol. ii., p. 432, says the ‘furious engine,’ artillery,
‘though it seemed contrived for the destruction of mankind and the
overthrow of empires, has in the issue rendered battles less bloody, and
 has given greater stability to civil societies,’ but his reasons are
somewhat different from those in the text above. This part of the
chapter is evidently adapted from Part iv. ‘Of Arms’ in the <i>Lectures,</i> pp. 260-264, and the dissertation on the rise, progress and fall of militarism in Part i., pp. 26-34.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘or’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Misprinted ‘their’ in eds. 4 and 5.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Lectures,</i> p. 10.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Lectures,</i>
 p. 15: ‘Till there be property there can be no government, the very end
 of which is to secure wealth and to defend the rich from the poor.’ Cp.
 Locke, <i>Civil Government,</i> § 94, ‘government has no other end but the preservation of property’.]</p></li>
<li><p>They are to be found in Tyrrel’s History of England. [<i>General History of England, both Ecclesiastical and Civil,</i> by James Tyrrell, vol. ii., 1700, pp. 576-579. The king is Richard I., not Henry II.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed.
 1 reads ‘except when they stand in need of the interposition of his
authority in order to protect them from the oppression of some of their
fellow subjects’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Iliad,</i> ix., 149-156, but the presents are not the ‘sole advantage’ mentioned.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The extraordinary accent here and seven lines lower down appears first in ed. 2.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Smith was in Toulouse from February or March, 1764, to August, 1765.—Rae, <i>Life of Adam Smith,</i> pp. 174, 175, 188.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Lectures,</i> p. 49. Above, vol. i., p. 367.]</p></li>
<li><p>[These two lines are not in eds. 1 and 2. See below, p. 223, note 1.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Eds. 1-4 read ‘is’; cp. below, p. 249, note 2.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘tear and wear’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘seems to be capable’.]</p></li>
<li><p>Since
 publishing the two first editions of this book, I have got good reasons
 to believe that all the turnpike tolls levied in Great Britain do not
produce a neat revenue that amounts to half a million; a sum which,
under the management of Government, would not be sufficient to keep in
repair five of the principal roads in the kingdom. [This and the next
note appear first in ed. 3.]</p></li>
<li><p>I have now good reasons to believe that all these conjectural sums are by much too large.</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads here and two lines lower down ‘tear and wear’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘partly in the six days’ labour’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Here and in the next sentence for ‘the labour of the country people,’ ed. 1 reads ‘the six days’ labour’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Voyages de François Bernier,</i>
 Amsterdam, 1710, can scarcely be said to discredit the ordinary eulogy
of Indian roads and canals by an account of any particular works, but it
 does so by not mentioning them in places where it would be natural to
do so if they had existed or been remarkable. See tom. ii., p. 249, ‘les
 grandes rivières qui en ces quartiers n’ont ordinairement point de
ponts’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘or’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed.
 1 reads ‘tyranny by which the intendant chastises any parish or
communauté which has had the misfortune to fall under his displeasure’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[This section (ending on p. 248) appears first in Additions and Corrections and ed. 3.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Anderson, <i>Commerce,</i> <span class="sc"><span class="entity ad">ad</span></span> 1606.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Ibid.,</i> <span class="sc"><span class="entity ad">ad</span></span> 1620, and cp. <span class="sc"><span class="entity ad">ad</span></span> 1623.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Sir Josiah Child, <i>New Discourse of Trade,</i>
 etc., chap. iii., divides companies into those in joint stock and those
 ‘who trade not by a joint stock, but only are under a government and
regulation’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The company or society of the Merchant Adventurers of England.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Additions
 and Corrections reads ‘Russian,’ probably a misprint, though ‘Russian,’
 which is incorrect, appears on the next page.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Eds. 1-3 read ‘restraints’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Anderson, <i>Commerce,</i> <span class="sc"><span class="entity ad">ad</span></span> 1643: the fine was doubled in that year, being raised to £100 for Londoners and £50 for others.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Anderson, <i>Commerce,</i> <span class="sc"><span class="entity ad">ad</span></span> 1661, under which the other two years are also mentioned.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Additions and Corrections and eds. 3 and 4 read ‘has’. Smith very probably wrote ‘there has been no complaint’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The preamble recites the history of the company.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Anderson, <i>Commerce,</i> <span class="sc"><span class="entity ad">ad</span></span> 1672.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>New Discourse of Trade,</i> chap. iii., quoted by Anderson, <i>Commerce,</i> <span class="sc"><span class="entity ad">ad</span></span>
 1672. This part of the book was not published till long after 1672, but
 seems to have been written before the closing of the Exchequer in that
year.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Anderson, <i>Commerce,</i> <span class="sc"><span class="entity ad">ad</span></span> 1605, 1643, 1753.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Additions and Corrections reads ‘extensive’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[See the preamble to 26 Geo. II., c. 18.—Anderson, <i>Commerce,</i> <span class="sc"><span class="entity ad">ad</span></span> 1753.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>New Discourse of Trade,</i> chap. iii.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Below, p. 234.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Additions and Corrections reads ‘all the other’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[A
 joint-stock company here is an incorporated or chartered company. The
common application of the term to other companies is later.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Anderson, <i>Commerce,</i> <span class="sc"><span class="entity ad">ad</span></span> 1723.]</p></li>
<li><p>[It stood at this amount from 1746 to the end of 1781, but was then increased by a call of 8 per cent.—Anderson, <i>Commerce,</i> <span class="sc"><span class="entity ad">ad</span></span> 1746, and (Continuation) <span class="sc"><span class="entity ad">ad</span></span> 1781.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Anderson, <i>Commerce,</i> <span class="sc"><span class="entity ad">ad</span></span> 1672 and <span class="sc"><span class="entity ad">ad</span></span> 1698.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Ibid.,</i> <span class="sc"><span class="entity ad">ad</span></span> 1670.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Ibid.,</i> <span class="sc"><span class="entity ad">ad</span></span> 1698.]</p></li>
<li><p>[10 Ann., c. 27. Anderson, <i>Commerce,</i> <span class="sc"><span class="entity ad">ad</span></span> 1712.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Ibid.,</i> <span class="sc"><span class="entity ad">ad</span></span> 1730. The annual grant continued till 1746.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Anderson, <i>Commerce,</i> <span class="sc"><span class="entity ad">ad</span></span> 1733.]</p></li>
<li><p>[23 Geo. II., c. 31; 25 Geo. II., c. 40; Anderson, <i>Commerce,</i> <span class="sc"><span class="entity ad">ad</span></span> 1750, 1752; above, p. 229.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Anderson, <i>Commerce,</i> <span class="sc"><span class="entity ad">ad</span></span> 1618, 1631 and 1662.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Ibid.,</i> <span class="sc"><span class="entity ad">ad</span></span> 1743, quoting Captain Christopher Middleton.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Anderson, <i>Commerce,</i> <span class="sc"><span class="entity ad">ad</span></span> 1670.]</p></li>
<li><p>[‘Eight or nine private merchants do engross nine-tenth parts of the company’s stock.’ Anderson, <i>Commerce,</i> <span class="sc"><span class="entity ad">ad</span></span> 1743, quoting from <i>An
 Account of the Countries Adjoining to Hudson’s Bay . . . with an
Abstract of Captain Middleton’s Journal and Observations upon his
Behaviour,</i> by Arthur Dobbs, Esq., 1744, p. 58.]</p></li>
<li><p>[In his <i>Account,</i>
 pp. 3 and 58, he talks of 2,000 per cent., but this, of course, only
refers to the difference between buying and selling prices.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Commerce,</i> <span class="sc"><span class="entity ad">ad</span></span> 1743, but the examination is not nearly so comprehensive, nor the expression of opinion so ample as is suggested by the text.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Anderson, <i>Commerce,</i> <span class="sc"><span class="entity ad">ad</span></span> 1713.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Ibid.,</i> <span class="sc"><span class="entity ad">ad</span></span> 1731, 1732 and 1734.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Ibid.,</i> <span class="sc"><span class="entity ad">ad</span></span> 1724 and 1732. But there was no successful voyage; the company were ‘considerable losers in every one’ of the eight years.]</p></li>
<li><p>[By 9 Geo. I., c. 6. Anderson, <i>Commerce,</i> <span class="sc"><span class="entity ad">ad</span></span> 1723.]</p></li>
<li><p>[This was done by 6 Geo. II., c. 28. <i>Ibid.,</i> <span class="sc"><span class="entity ad">ad</span></span> 1733.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Ibid.,</i> <span class="sc"><span class="entity ad">ad</span></span> 1732 and <span class="sc"><span class="entity ad">ad</span></span> 1733.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Ibid.,</i> <span class="sc"><span class="entity ad">ad</span></span> 1748 and <span class="sc"><span class="entity ad">ad</span></span> 1750.]</p></li>
<li><p>[‘Until
 this time the English East India trade was carried on by several
separate stocks, making particular running-voyages; but in this year
they united all into one general joint-capital stock.’ Anderson, <i>Commerce,</i> <span class="sc"><span class="entity ad">ad</span></span> 1612.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Ibid.,</i> <span class="sc"><span class="entity ad">ad</span></span> 1693.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Ibid.,</i> <span class="sc"><span class="entity ad">ad</span></span> 1676.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Ibid.,</i> <span class="sc"><span class="entity ad">ad</span></span> 1681 and <span class="sc"><span class="entity ad">ad</span></span> 1685.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The whole of this history is in Anderson, <i>Commerce,</i> <span class="sc"><span class="entity ad">ad</span></span> 1698.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Anderson, <i>Commerce,</i> <span class="sc"><span class="entity ad">ad</span></span> 1701.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Ibid.,</i> <span class="sc"><span class="entity ad">ad</span></span> 1730.]</p></li>
<li><p>[‘This
 coalition was made on the 22nd of July, 1702, by an indenture
tripartite between the Queen and the said two companies.’—Anderson, <i>Commerce,</i> <span class="sc"><span class="entity ad">ad</span></span> 1702.]</p></li>
<li><p>[6 Ann., c. 17. Anderson, <i>Commerce,</i> <span class="sc"><span class="entity ad">ad</span></span> 1708.]</p></li>
<li><p>[7 Geo. III., c. 49, and 8 Geo. III., c. 11.]</p></li>
<li><p>[In 1772-3. Additions and Corrections and ed. 3 read ‘subjects’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[13 Geo. III., c. 63.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>House of Commons Journals,</i> April 27, 1773.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The
 spelling in other parts of the work is ‘neat’. The Additions and
Corrections read ‘nett’ both here and five lines above. The discrepancy
was obviously noticed in one case and not in the other.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Examen de la réponse de M. N</i>** [Necker] <i>au Mémoire de M. l’Abbé Morellet, sur la Compagnie des Indes.</i> par l’auteur du Mémoire, 1769, pp. 35-38.]</p></li>
<li><p>[6 Ann., c. 22.]</p></li>
<li><p>[At least as against private persons, Anderson, <i>Commerce,</i> <span class="sc"><span class="entity ad">ad</span></span> 1720.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Eds. 4 and 5 insert ‘it’ here, by a misprint.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Additions and Corrections and ed. 3 read ‘was’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, vol. i., pp. 276-283.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Anderson, <i>Commerce,</i> <span class="sc"><span class="entity ad">ad</span></span> 1690, 1704, 1710, 1711.]</p></li>
<li><p>[This section, beginning on p. 223, appears first in Additions and Corrections and ed. 3.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘the youth’ as in the first line of the text.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Eds. 1-4 read ‘is’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘the year’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Rae, <i>Life of Adam Smith,</i> p. 48, thinks Smith’s salary at Glasgow may have been about £70 with a house, and his fees near £100.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Eds. 1 and 2 read ‘in physic’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 does not contain ‘the’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘and they still continue to be so in some universities’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[‘Necessarily’ and ‘naturally’ are transposed in ed. 1.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘those’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘Those two chapters were’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads, ‘What was called Metaphysics or Pneumatics was set in opposition to Physics, and was cultivated’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘of’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, p. 250.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Repeated all but <i>verbatim</i> from above, p. 191.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Hist.,</i> vi., 56; xviii., 34.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Ant. Rom.,</i> ii., xxiv. to xxvii., esp. xxvi.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Repub.,</i> iii., 400-401.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Politics,</i> 1340 <i>a.</i>]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Hist.,</i> iv., 20.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Esprit des lois,</i> liv. iv., chap. viii., where Plato, Aristotle and Polybius are quoted.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Iliad,</i> xiii., 137; xviii., 494, 594; <i>Odyssey,</i> i., 152; viii., 265; xviii., 304; xxiii., 134.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 places ‘those parents’ here.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Plutarch, <i>Life of Solon,</i> quoted by Montesquieu, <i>Esprit des Lois,</i> liv., xxvi., ch. v.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The
 words ‘one of’ do not occur in eds. 1 and 2. They are perhaps a
misprint for ‘some of’ or a misreading suggested by a failure to
understand that ‘his own life’ is that of Marcus Antoninus. See Lucian, <i>Eunuchus,</i> iii.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, p. 262.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘the minds of men are not’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘from’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘the’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘as it is capable of being’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘the use of those members’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Eds. 1-3 read ‘is’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[In ‘Discourses on the First Decade of Titus Livius,’ book iii., chap. i.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The original reads ‘finances, armies, fleets’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Hume, <i>History,</i> chap. xxix., vol. iv., pp. 30, 31, in ed. of 1773, which differs verbally both from earlier and from later editions.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘of each sect’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘the most numerous sect’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘of each sect’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘Roman catholic church’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 does not contain ‘and’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[These nine words are not in ed. 1.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘great and consistorial’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Daniel, <i>Histoire de France,</i> 1755, tom. vii., pp. 158, 159; tom. ix., p. 40.]</p></li>
<li><p>[‘Il
 ne lui resta que deux domestiques pour le servir et lui préparer à
manger, encore faisaient-ils passer par le feu les plats où il mangeait,
 et les vases où il buvait pour les purifier, comme ayant été fouillés
par un homme retranché de la communion des fidèles.’—<i>Ibid.,</i> tom. iii., pp. 305-306. Hénault’s account is similar, <i>Nouvel Abrégé chronologique,</i> 1768, tom. i., p. 114, <span class="sc"><span class="entity ad">ad</span></span> 996.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘by the general prevalence of those doctrines’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Eds. 1 and 2 read ‘take party’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The
 ‘Act concerning Patronages,’ 53rd of the second session of the first
parliament of William and Mary, is doubtless meant, but this is a
separate Act from the ‘Act ratifying the Confession of Faith and
settling Presbyterian Church Government,’ <i>Acts of the Parliaments of Scotland,</i> 1822, vol. ix., pp. 133, 196.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The preamble of the Act mentions ‘the great hardship upon the patrons’ as well as the ‘great heats and divisions’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘small benefice’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Voltaire’s expression is not quite so strong as it is represented. He says in the catalogue of writers in the <i>Siècle de Louis XIV.,</i>
 ‘Porée (Charles), né en Normandie en 1675, Jésuite, du petit nombre des
 professeurs qui ont eu de la célébrité chez les gens du monde. Eloquent
 dans le goût de Sénèque, poéte et très bel esprit. Son plus grand
mérite fut de faire aimer les lettres et la vertu à ses disciples. Mort
en 1741.’]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Quaere</i>
 as to Suetonius. Ed. 1 continues here ‘Several of those whom we do not
know with certainty to have been public teachers appear to have been
private tutors. Polybius, we know, was private tutor to Scipio
Æmilianus; Dionysius of Halicarnassus, there are some probable reasons
for believing, was so to the children of Marcus and Quintus Cicero.’]</p></li>
<li><p>[The <i>Lectures</i> leave little doubt that this is a fragment of autobiography.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed.
 5 reads ‘expences,’ but this seems to be a misprint or misreading
suggested by the fact that several expenses have been mentioned.]</p></li>
<li><p>See
 Memoires concernant les Droits &amp; Impositions en Europe: tome i.
page 73. This work was compiled by the order of the court for the use of
 a commission employed for some years past in considering the proper
means for reforming the finances of France. The account of the French
taxes, which takes up three volumes in quarto, may be regarded as
perfectly authentic. That of those of other European nations was
compiled from such informations as the French ministers at the different
 courts could procure. It is much shorter, and probably not quite so
exact as that of the French taxes. [The book is by Moreau de Beaumont,
Paris, 1768-9, 4 vols., 4to. The correct title of vol. i. is <i>Mémoires concernant les Impositions et Droits en Europe;</i> vols. ii.-iv. are <i>Mémoires concernant les Impositions et Droits,</i> 2de. Ptie., <i>Impositions et Droits en France.</i> Smith obtained his copy through Turgot, and attached great value to it, believing it to be very rare. See Bonar, <i>Catalogue,</i> p. 10.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Hist. of Florence,</i> bk. viii., <i>ad fin.</i>]</p></li>
<li><p>[Details are given above, p. 242, but that is in a passage which appears first in ed. 3.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, p. 298.]</p></li>
<li><p>See Memoires concernant les Droits &amp; Impositions en Europe; tome i. p. 73.</p></li>
<li><p>[The figures are those of the Land Tax Acts.]</p></li>
<li><p>[See on these estimates Sir Robert Giffen, <i>Growth of Capital,</i> 1889, pp. 89, 90.]</p></li>
<li><p>See
 Sketches of the History of Man [1774, by Henry Home, Lord Kames, vol.
i.] page 474 &amp; seq. [This author at the place quoted gives six
‘general rules’ as to taxation:—</p><p id="Smith_0206-02_1588"><span id="lf0206-02_label_795">1.</span> ‘That wherever there is an opportunity of smuggling taxes ought to be moderate.’</p><p id="Smith_0206-02_1589"><span id="lf0206-02_label_796">2.</span> ‘That taxes expensive in the levying ought to be avoided.’</p><p id="Smith_0206-02_1590"><span id="lf0206-02_label_797">3.</span> ‘To avoid arbitrary taxes.’</p><p id="Smith_0206-02_1591"><span id="lf0206-02_label_798">4.</span> ‘To remedy’ inequality of riches ‘as much as possible, by relieving the poor and burdening the rich.’</p><p id="Smith_0206-02_1592"><span id="lf0206-02_label_799">5.</span> ‘That every tax which tends to impoverish the nation ought to be rejected with indignation.’</p><p id="Smith_0206-02_1593"><span id="lf0206-02_label_800">6.</span> ‘To avoid taxes that require the oath of party.’]</p></li>
<li><p>[In ed. 1 ‘as they could contrive’ comes here instead of three lines earlier.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘is imposed according to’. For the origin of the stereotyped assessment of the land tax, see Cannan, <i>Hist. of Local Rates in England,</i> 1896, pp. 114-119.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 2 reads ‘They contribute’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed.
 1, beginning after ‘the same revenue,’ six lines higher up, reads ‘As
the tax does not rise with the rise of the rent, the sovereign does not
share in the profits of the landlord’s improvements. The tax therefore
does not discourage those improvements.’]</p></li>
<li><p>Memoires concernant les Droits [tom. i.] p. 240, 241.</p></li>
<li><p>Memoires concernant les Droits, &amp;c. tome i. p. 114, 115, 116, &amp;c.</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Ibid.,</i> pp. 117-119.]</p></li>
<li><p>Memoires concernant les Droits, &amp;c. tome i. p. 83, 84 [and 79].</p></li>
<li><p>Id. p. 280, &amp;c. also p. 287, &amp;c. to 316.</p></li>
<li><p>[As stated just above.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Mémoires,</i> tom. i., p. 282.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Misprinted ‘tallie’ here and five lines lower down in eds. 2-5.]</p></li>
<li><p>Memoires concernant les Droits &amp;c. torne ii. p. 139, &amp;c. [pp. 145-147].</p></li>
<li><p>[31 Geo. II., c. 12, continued by 5 Geo. III., c. 18.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Genesis xlvii. 26.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, p. 181.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Eds. 1-4 read ‘a fifth’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, vol. i., p. 263.]</p></li>
<li><p>Since
 the first publication of this book, a tax nearly upon the
above-mentioned principles has been imposed. [This note appears first in
 ed. 3. The tax was first imposed by 18 Geo. III., c. 26, and was at the
 rate of 6d. in the pound on houses of £5 and under £50 annual value,
and 1s. in the pound on houses of higher value, but by 19 Geo. III., c.
59, the rates were altered to 6d. in the pound on houses of £5 and under
 £20 annual value, 9d. on those of £20 and under £40, and 1s. on those
of £40 and upwards.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘the houses’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 does not contain this sentence.]</p></li>
<li><p>Memoires concernant les Droits, &amp;c. [tom. i.], p. 223.</p></li>
<li><p>[Chap. ix.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, vol. i., pp. 90, 91.]</p></li>
<li><p>Memoires concernant les Droits, tome i. p. 74.</p></li>
<li><p>[The <i>Mémoires</i>
 only say ‘La taille consiste dans le quart pour cent que tout habitant,
 sans exception, est obligé de payer de tout ce qu’il possède en meubles
 et immeubles. Il ne se fait aucune répartition de cette taille. Chaque
bourgeois se cottise lui-même et porte son imposition à la maison de
ville, et on n’exige autre chose de lui, sinon le serment qu’il est
obligé de faire que ce qu’il paye forme véritablement ce qu’il doit
acquitter.’ But Lord Kames, <i>Sketches of the History of Man,</i>
 vol. i., p. 476, says, ‘Every merchant puts privately into the public
chest, the sum that, in his own opinion, he ought to contribute.’]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘Underwold’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 5 adds ‘it’ here, doubtless a misprint.]</p></li>
<li><p>Memoires
 concernant les Droits, tome i. p. 163, 166, 171. [The statements as to
the confidence felt in these self-assessments are not taken from the <i>Mémoires.</i>]</p></li>
<li><p>[Proposed by Legge in 1759. See Dowell, <i>History of Taxation and Taxes in England,</i> 1884, vol. ii., p. 137.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 does not contain ‘a’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, vol. i., p. 369.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, p. 320.]</p></li>
<li><p>Memoires concernant les Droits, &amp;c. tome ii. p. 17.</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘nor to’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, vol. i., p. 369.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘West India’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>E.g.,</i> by Montesquieu, <i>Esprit des lois,</i> liv., xiii., chap. xiv.]</p></li>
<li><p>[17 Geo. III., c. 39.]</p></li>
<li><p>[This paragraph is not in ed. 1.]</p></li>
<li><p>Lib. 55 [(25) quoted by Burman and Bouchaud]. See also Burman de Vectigalibus Pop. Rom. cap. xi. [in <i>Utriusque thesauri antiquitatum romanarum graecarumque nova supplementa</i> congesta ab Joanne Poleno, Venice, 1737, vol. i., p. 1032B] and Bouchaud de l’impôt du vingtieme sur les successions [<i>et de l’impôt sur les marchandises chez les Romains,</i> nouv. ed., 1772, pp. 10 <i>sqq.</i>]</p></li>
<li><p>See Memoires concernant les Droits, &amp;c. tome i. p. 225.</p></li>
<li><p>[All eds. read ‘fiftieth,’ but the <i>Mémoires</i> say ‘quinzième’ and the ‘only’ in the next sentence shows that Smith intended to write ‘fifteenth’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 does not contain ‘very’.]</p></li>
<li><p>Memoires concernant les Droits, &amp;c. tome i. p. 154.</p></li>
<li><p>Id. p. 157.</p></li>
<li><p>Memoires concernant les Droits, &amp;c. tome i. p. 223, 224, 225.</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘or the mortgage’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘give only’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 does not contain ‘neat’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The word is used in its older sense, equivalent to the modern ‘pamphlets’. See Murray, <i>Oxford English Dictionary, s.v.</i>]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 does not contain ‘in proportion to the tax’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 does not contain ‘in that proportion’.]</p></li>
<li><p>Memoires concernant les Droits, &amp;c. tom. ii. p. 108.</p></li>
<li><p>Id. tom. iii. [really i.] p. 87.</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, vol. i., pp. 102-112.]</p></li>
<li><p>[‘Was supposed to be’ is equivalent to ‘was nominally but not really’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Eds.
 1 and 2 read ‘a real tax of five shillings in the pound upon the
salaries of offices which exceeded a hundred pounds a year; those of the
 judges and a few others less obnoxious to envy excepted.’ Under 31 Geo.
 II., c. 22, a tax of 1s. in the pound was imposed on all offices worth
more than £100 a year, naval and military offices excepted. The judges
were not excepted, but their salaries were raised soon afterwards. See
Dowell, <i>History of Taxation and Taxes,</i> vol.
ii., pp. 135-136. The 6d. seems a mistake; the 5s. is arrived at by
adding the 4s. land tax (which was ‘real’ in the case of offices) and
the 1s.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The first of these is under 1 W. and M., sess. 1, c. 13.]</p></li>
<li><p>[1 W. and M., sess. 2, c. 7, § 2.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Under
 1 W. and M., c. 13, § 4, serjeants, attorneys and proctors, as well as
certain other classes, were to pay 3s. in the pound on their receipts.
Under 1 W. and M., sess. 2, c. 7, § 2, attorneys and proctors and others
 were to pay 20s. in addition to the sums already charged. Under 2 W.
and M., sess. 1, c. 2, § 5, serjeants-at-law were to pay £15, apparently
 in addition to the 3s. in the pound. Under 3 W. and M., c. 6, the
poundage charge does not appear at all. The alterations were doubtless
made in order to secure certainty, but purely in the interest of the
government, which desired to be certain of getting a fixed amount. Under
 the Land Tax Act of 8 and 9 W. III., c. 6, § 5, serjeants, attorneys,
proctors, etc., are again charged to an income tax.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘portion’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Mémoires,</i> tom. ii., p. 421.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Dr. John Arbuthnot, in his <i>Tables of Ancient Coins, Weights and Measures,</i>
 2nd ed., 1754, p. 142, says that linen was not used among the Romans,
at least by men, till about the time of Alexander Severus.]</p></li>
<li><p>[In <i>Lectures,</i> p. 179, and above in ed. i., vol. i., p. 430, note, beer seems to be regarded as a necessary of life rather than a luxury.]</p></li>
<li><p>See Book I., Chap. 8.</p></li>
<li><p>[1 Geo. III., c. 7.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Leather is Decker’s example, <i>Essay on the Decline of the Foreign Trade,</i> 2nd ed., 1750, pp. 29, 30. See also p. 10.]</p></li>
<li><p>[See Dowell, <i>History of Taxation and Taxes,</i> 1884, vol. iv., pp. 318, 322, 330.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Saxby, <i>British Customs,</i> p. 307. 8 Ann., c. 4; 9 Ann., c. 6.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, vol. i., p. 392.]</p></li>
<li><p>Memoires concernant les Droits, &amp;c. p. 210, 211 [and 233. See below, p. 390.]</p></li>
<li><p>Le Reformateur. [Amsterdam, 1756. Garnier in his note on this passage, <i>Recherches, etc.,</i>
 tom. iv., p. 387, attributes this work to Clicquot de Blervache, French
 Inspector-general of Manufactures and Commerce, 1766-90, but later
authorities doubt or deny Clicquot’s authorship. See Jules de Vroil, <i>Étude sur Clicquot-Blervache,</i> 1870, pp. xxxi-xxxiii.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>De Divinatione,</i> ii., 58, ‘Sed nescio quomodo nihil tam absurde dici potest quod non dicatur ab aliquo philosophorum.’]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Essay on the Causes of the Decline of the Foreign Trade,</i> 2nd ed., 1750, pp. 78-163.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Eds. 1-3 read ‘was’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Eds. 1 and 2 read ‘which’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Eds. 1-3 read ‘was’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, vol. i., pp. 429, 458.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Gilbert, <i>Treatise on the Court of Exchequer,</i> 1758, p. 224, mentions a Book of Rates printed in 1586. Dowell, <i>History of Taxation and Taxes,</i> 1884, vol. i., pp. 146, 165, places the beginning of the system soon after 1558.]</p></li>
<li><p>[C. 23.]</p></li>
<li><p>[2 and 3 Ann., c. 9; 3 and 4 Ann., c. 5.]</p></li>
<li><p>[21 Geo. II., c. 2.]</p></li>
<li><p>[32
 Geo. II., c. 10, on tobacco, linen, sugar and other grocery, except
currants, East India goods (except coffee and raw silk), brandy and
other spirits (except colonial rum), and paper.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads, more intelligibly, ‘later’. Another example of this unfortunate change occurs below, p. 417.</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, p. 2, written after the present passage.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Eds. 1-3 read ‘peculiar,’ and ‘particular’ is perhaps a misprint.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, pp. 146-150.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, pp., 155, 156.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Swift
 attributes the saying to an unnamed commissioner of customs. ‘I will
tell you a secret, which I learned many years ago from the commissioners
 of the customs in London: they said when any commodity appeared to be
taxed above a moderate rate, the consequence was to lessen that branch
of the revenue by one-half; and one of these gentlemen pleasantly told
me that the mistake of parliaments on such occasions was owing to an
error of computing two and two make four; whereas in the business of
laying impositions, two and two never made more than one; which happens
by lessening the import, and the strong temptation of running such goods
 as paid high duties, at least in this kingdom.’—‘Answer to a Paper
Called a Memorial of the Poor Inhabitants, Tradesmen and Labourers of
the Kingdom of Ireland’ (in <i>Works,</i> ed. Scott, 2nd ed., 1883, vol. vii., pp. 165-166. The saying is quoted from Swift by Hume in his <i>Essay on the Balance of Trade,</i> and by Lord Kames in his <i>Sketches of the History of Man,</i> 1774, vol. i., p. 474.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Saxby, <i>British Customs,</i> p. 266.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Eds. 1-3 read ‘was’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘both upon’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘both from’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘and from’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘£3,314.223 18s. 10¾d.’]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘is not to expose private families to’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Eds. 1-3 read ‘was’.]</p></li>
<li><p>Though
 the duties directly imposed upon proof spirits amount only to 2s. 6d.
per gallon, these added to the duties upon the low wines, from which
they are distilled, amount to 3s. 10⅔d. Both low wines and proof spirits
 are, to prevent frauds, now rated according to what they gauge in the
wash. [This note appears first in ed. 3; ed. 1 reads ‘2s. 6d.’ in the
text instead of ‘3s. 10⅔d.’]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Political and Commercial Works,</i>
 ed. Sir Charles Whitworth, 1771, vol. i., pp. 222, 223. But Davenant
does not confine the effect of the existing tax to the maltster, the
brewer and the retailer. The tax, he says, ‘which seems to be upon malt,
 does not lie all upon that commodity, as is vulgarly thought. For a
great many different persons contribute to the payment of this duty,
before it comes into the Exchequer. First, the landlord, because of the
excise, is forced to let his barley land at a lower rate; and, upon the
same score, the tenant must sell his barley at a less price; then the
maltster bears his share, for because of the duty, he must abate
something in the price of his malt, or keep it; in a proportion it
likewise affects the hop merchant, the cooper, the collier, and all
trades that have relation to the commodity. The retailers and brewers
bear likewise a great share, whose gains of necessity will be less,
because of that imposition; and, lastly, it comes heaviest of all upon
the consumers.’ If the duty were put upon the maltster, it would be
‘difficult for him to raise the price of a dear commodity a full ⅓d. at
once: so that he must bear the greatest part of the burden himself, or
throw it upon the farmer, by giving less for barley, which brings the
tax directly upon the land of England.’]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 does not contain ‘it’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘are perhaps’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 does not contain ‘all’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘should’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘£5,479,695 7s. 10d.’]</p></li>
<li><p>The neat produce of that year, after deducting all expences and allowances, amounted to 4,975,652 <i>l.</i> 19 <i>s.</i> 6 <i>d.</i> [This note appears first in ed. 2.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, p. 312.]</p></li>
<li><p>Memoires
 concernant les Droits, &amp;c. tom. i. p. 455. [‘La première branche,
connue sous la dénomination de Alcavala y Cientos, consiste dans un
droit qui se perçoit sur toutes les choses mobiliaires et immobiliaires
qui sont vendues, échangées et négociées: ce droit qui dans le principe
avoit été fixé à quatorze pour cent a été depuis réduit à six pour
cent.’ The rest of the information is probably from Uztariz, <i>Theory and Practice of Commerce and Maritime Affairs,</i> trans. by John Kippax, 1751, chap. 96, <i>ad init.,</i>
 vol. ii., p. 236. ‘It is so very oppressive as to lay 10 per cent. for
the primitive Alcavala, and the four 1 per cents. annexed to it, a duty
not only chargeable on the first sale, but on every future sale of
goods, I am jealous, it is one of the principal engines, that
contributed to the ruin of most of our manufactures and trade. For
though these duties are not charged to the full in some places, a heavy
tax is paid.’]</p></li>
<li><p>[See the preceding note. Uztariz’ opinion is quoted by Lord Kames, <i>Sketches of the History of Man,</i> 1774, vol. i., p. 516.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘rent certain’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘the taxes’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, p. 342.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 does not contain ‘the traites’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[These estimates seem to have been quoted in England at the time, since the Continuation of Anderson’s <i>Commerce,</i>
 under the year 1773, mentions ‘the calculations of the Abbé D’Expilly
published about this time in Paris,’ which gave 8,661,381 births and
6,664,161 deaths as the number taking place in the nine years, 1754 to
1763, in France, inclusive of Lorraine and Bar. In his <i>Dictionnaire géographique, historique et politique des Gaules et de la France,</i> tom. v. (1768), <i>s.v.</i> Population, Expilly estimated the population at 22,014,357. See Levasseur, <i>La Population française,</i> tom. i., 1889, pp. 215 and 216 note.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Sur la législation et le commerce des grains</i> (by Necker), 1775, ch. viii., estimates the population at 24,181,333 by the method of multiplying the deaths by 31.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, p. 359.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Below, p. 414.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, vol. i., pp. 383, 384.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, vol. i., p. 389.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Cp. vol. i., pp. 267, 268.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, vol. i., p. 412.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Repeated <i>verbatim</i> from vol. i., p. 412.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, vol. i., p. 408.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, p. 304.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 5 omits ‘along,’ doubtless by a misprint.]</p></li>
<li><p>See Examen des Reflexions politiques sur les Finances. [P. J. Duverney, <i>Examen du livre intitulé Réflexions politiques sur les finances et le commerce</i> (by Du Tot), tom. i., p. 225.]</p></li>
<li><p>[James Postlethwayt, <i>History of the Public Revenue,</i>
 1759, pp. 14, 15, mentions discounts of 25 and 55 per cent. The
discount varied with the priority of the tallies and did not measure the
 national credit in general, but the probability of particular taxes
bringing in enough to pay the amounts charged upon them.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘unprovident,’ as do all editions below, p. 400.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Postlethwayt, <i>op. cit.,</i> p. 38. Ed. 5 misprints ‘9½d.’]</p></li>
<li><p>[Postlethwayt, <i>op. cit.,</i> p. 40.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Ibid.,</i> p. 59.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Ibid.,</i> pp. 63, 64.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Ibid.,</i> p. 68.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Ibid.,</i> p. 71.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Ibid.,</i> p. 311.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Ibid.,</i> pp. 301-303, and see above, vol. i., p. 302.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Ibid.,</i> pp. 319, 320.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The odd £4,000 of the £206,501 13s. 5d. was for expenses of management. See above, vol. i., p. 302.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘payment,’ perhaps correctly.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Postlethwayt, <i>History of the Public Revenue,</i> p. 305.]</p></li>
<li><p>[This Act belongs to 1716, not 1717.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, vol. i., pp. 90, 91.]</p></li>
<li><p>[In 1717, under the provisions of 3 Geo. I., c. 7. Postlethwayt, <i>History of the Public Revenue,</i> pp. 120, 145.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Anderson, <i>Commerce,</i> <span class="sc"><span class="entity ad">ad</span></span> 1717.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Ibid.,</i> <span class="sc"><span class="entity ad">ad</span></span> 1727.]</p></li>
<li><p>[This should be 1750. Anderson. <i>Commerce,</i> <span class="sc"><span class="entity ad">ad</span></span> 1749.]</p></li>
<li><p>[5 and 6 W. and M., c. 7.]</p></li>
<li><p>[4 W. and M., c. 3.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Anderson, <i>Commerce,</i> <span class="sc"><span class="entity ad">ad</span></span> 1719.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Ibid.,</i> <span class="sc"><span class="entity ad">ad</span></span> 1720.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘just as long as’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Anderson, <i>Commerce,</i> mentions these reductions under their dates, and recalls them in reference to the British reduction in 1717.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘long and short’.]</p></li>
<li><p>See
 James Postlethwaite’s history of the public revenue. [Pp. 42, 143-145,
147, 224, 300. The reference covers the three paragraphs in the text
above.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, p. 401.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Present State of the Nation</i> (above, vol. i., p. 409), p. 28.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Anderson, <i>Commerce,</i> postscript <i>ad init.</i>]</p></li>
<li><p>[‘But the expenses of the war did not cease with its operations.’—<i>Considerations</i> (see a few lines below), p. 4.]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Ibid.,</i> p. 5.]</p></li>
<li><p>[The account is given in the Continuation of Anderson’s <i>Commerce,</i> <span class="sc"><span class="entity ad">ad</span></span> 1764, vol. iv., p. 58, in ed. of 1801. The ‘¾d.’ should be ‘¼d.’]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Considerations
 on the Trade and Finances of this Kingdom and on the measures of
administration with respect to those great national objects since the
conclusion of the peace,</i> by Thomas Whately, 1766 (often ascribed to George Grenville), p. 22.]</p></li>
<li><p>[This
 is the amount obtained by adding the two items mentioned, and is the
reading of ed. 1. Eds. 2-5 all read ‘£139,516,807 2s. 4d.,’ which is
doubtless a misprint. The total is not given in <i>Considerations.</i>]</p></li>
<li><p>[<i>Considerations,</i> p. 4.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘Among’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Eds. 1-3 read ‘was’.]</p></li>
<li><p>It
 has proved more expensive than any of our former wars; and has involved
 us in an additional debt of more than one hundred millions. During a
profound peace of eleven years, little more than ten millions of debt
was paid; during a war of seven years, more than one hundred millions
was contracted. [This note appears first in ed. 3.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Garnier’s note, <i>Recherches etc.,</i> tom. iv., p. 501, is ‘Pinto: <i>Traité de la Circulation et du Crédit,</i>’
 a work published in 1771 (‘Amsterdam’), ‘par l’auteur de l’essai sur le
 luxe,’ of which see esp. pp. 44, 45, 209-211. But an English essay of
1731 to the same effect is quoted by Melon, <i>Essai Politique sur le Commerce,</i> chap. xxiii., ed. of 1761, p. 296, and Melon seems to be referred to below, p. 412. Cp. <i>Lectures,</i> p. 210.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Eds. 1-3 read the indicative, ‘destroys’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Misprinted ‘it’ in ed. 5.]</p></li>
<li><p>[‘Les
 Dettes d’un État sont des dettes de la main droite à la main gauche,
dont le corps ne se trouvera point affaibli, s’il a la quantité
d’aliments nécessaires, et s’il sait les distribuer.’—Melon, <i>Essai politique sur le Commerce,</i> chap. xxiii., ed. of 1761, p. 296.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘most’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, p. 390.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Eds. 1 and 2 read ‘seems’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Raynal
 says ‘L’évidence autorise seulement à dire que les gouvernements qui
pour le malheur des peuples ont adopté le détestable système des
emprunts doivent tôt ou tard l’abjurer: et que l’abus qu’ils en ont fait
 les forcera vraisemblablement à être infidèles.’—<i>Histoire philosophique,</i> Amsterdam, 1773, tom. iv., p. 274.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Eds. 1 and 2 read ‘later’; cp. above, p. 364.]</p></li>
<li><p>[This chapter of Roman history is based on a few sentences in Pliny, <i>H.N.,</i>
 lib. xxxiii., cap. iii. Modern criticism has discovered the facts to be
 not nearly so simple as they are represented in the text.]</p></li>
<li><p>See
 Du Cange Glossary, voce Moneta; the Benedictine edition. [This gives a
table of the alterations made in the coin and refers to Le Blanc, <i>Traité historique des Monnoyes de France,</i>
 1792, in which the fact that the officers were adjured by their oaths
to keep the matter secret is mentioned on p. 218, but the adjuration is
also quoted in the more accessible Melon, <i>Essai politique sur le Commerce,</i> chap. xiii., ed. of 1761, p. 177.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Misprinted ‘never’ in eds. 2-5.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘either of’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘or’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, pp. 313, 319, 320.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, p. 78.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, pp. 360-361.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Eds. 1-3 read ‘was’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Given in the Continuation of Anderson’s <i>Commerce,</i> <span class="sc"><span class="entity ad">ad</span></span> 1774, vol. iv., p. 178, in ed. of 1801.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, p. 75.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘late’; cp. above, vol. i., p. 462.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Eds. 1 and 2 read ‘West Indian’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Eds. 1-3 read ‘was’ here and five lines below.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Eds. 1-3 read ‘was’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, vol. i., pp. 275-280.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 omits ‘the’.]</p></li>
<li><p>See Hutchinson’s Hist. of Massachusett’s Bay, Vol. II., page 436 &amp; seq. [<i>History of the Colony of Massachusets Bay,</i> 2nd ed., 1765-8.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘of’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘must generally’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘paid either’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, p. 80, note 3.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Ed. 1 reads ‘gold and silver’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Eds. 1-3 read ‘was’.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, vol. i., p. 408.]</p></li>
<li><p>[Above, pp. 91-130.]</p></li>
<li><p>[See above, p. 21.]</p></li>
<li><p>[In
 Additions and Corrections this matter is printed in the text, and
consequently the reading here is ‘confirm what is said above’.]</p></li>
</li></ol></section></body>
</html>
